I (Legislativ e acts) REGUL A TIONS REGUL A TION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUR OPEAN P ARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 Apr il 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free mo v ement of such dat a, and repealing Directiv e 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (T ext with EEA relevance) THE EUR OPEAN P ARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUR OPEAN UNION, Ha ving regar d to the T reaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in par ticular Ar ticle 16 thereof, Ha ving regar d to the proposal from the European Commission, Af ter transmission of the draf t legislative act to the national parliaments, Ha ving regar d to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committ ee ( 1 ), Ha ving regar d to the opinion of the Committ ee of the Regions ( 2 ), A cting in accordance with the ordinar y legislative procedure ( 3 ), Whereas: (1) The protection of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data is a fundamental r ight. Ar ticle 8(1) of the Char ter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the Char te r ) and Ar ticle 16(1) of the T reaty on the Functioning of the European U nion (TFEU) pro vide that ever y one has the r ight to the prot ection of personal data concer ning him or her . (2) The pr inciples of, and r ules on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of their personal data should, whate ver their nationality or residence, respect their fundamental r ights and freedoms, in par ticular their r ight to the prote ction of personal data. This Regulation is inte nded to contr ibute to the accompl ishment of an area of freedom, secur ity and justice and of an economic union, to economic and social progress, to the strengthening and the converg ence of the economies within the inte r nal mark et, and to the well-being of natural persons. (3) Directive 95/46/EC of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 4 ) seeks to har monise the prot ection of fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons in respect of processing activities and to ensure the free f lo w of personal data between Member State s. 4.5.2016 L 119/1 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) OJ C 229, 31.7.2012, p. 90. ( 2 ) OJ C 391, 18.12.2012, p. 127. ( 3 ) P osition of the European P arliament of 12 March 2014 (not yet published in the Offi cial Jour nal) and position of the Council at first reading of 8 Apr il 2016 (not yet published in the Offi cial Jour nal). P osition of the European Parliament of 14 Apr il 2016. ( 4 ) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard t o the processing of personal data and on the free mo vement of such data (OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31). (4) The processing of personal data should be designed to ser ve mankind. The r ight to the prote ction of personal data is not an absolute r ight ; it must be considered in relation to its function in society and be balanced ag ainst other fundamental r ights, in accordance with the pr inciple of propor tionality . This Regulation respects all fundamental r ights and obser ves the freedoms and pr inciples recognised in the Char ter as enshr ined in the T reaties, in par ticular the respect f or pr ivate and f amily life, home and communications, the protection of personal data, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of expression and inf or mation, freedom to conduct a business, the r ight to an eff ective remedy and to a fa ir tr ial, and cultural, religious and linguistic diversity . (5) The economic and social inte gration resulting from the functioning of the intern al mark et has led to a substantial increase in cross-border f lo ws of personal data. The exc hange of personal data between public and pr ivate actor s, including natural persons, associations and under takings across the U nion has increased. National author ities in the Member State s are being called upon by Union law to cooperate and exc hange personal data so as to be able to perform their duties or car r y out tasks on behalf of an author ity in another Member State . (6) R apid tec hnological developments and g lobalisation have brought new c hallenges f or the protection of personal data. The scale of the collection and shar ing of personal data has increased signif icantly . T echn ology allo ws both pr ivate companies and public author ities to mak e use of personal data on an un precedented scale in order to pursue their activities. Natural persons increasing ly mak e personal inf or mation available publicly and g lobally . T ech nology has transf or med both the econom y and social life, and should fur ther facilitat e the free f lo w of personal data within the U nion and the transfer to third countr ies and inte r national orga nisations, while ensur ing a high level of the protection of personal data. (7) Those developments require a strong and more coherent data prot ection framew ork in the U nion, back ed by strong enf orcement, given the impor tance of creating the tr ust that will allo w the digital econom y to develop across the internal mark et. Natural persons should hav e control of their o wn personal data. Legal and practical cer tainty f or natural persons, economic operat ors and public author ities should be enhanced. (8) Where this Regulation pro vides f or specific ations or restr ictions of its r ules by Member Stat e la w , Member Stat es ma y , as f ar as necessar y f or coherence and f or making the national pro visions compreh ensible to the persons to whom they apply , incor porate elements of this Regulation into their national la w . (9) The objectives and pr inciples of Directive 95/46/EC remain sound, but it has not prevente d fragmentation in the im plementation of data protection across the Union, legal uncer tainty or a widespread public percep tion that there are signif icant r isks to the protection of natural persons, in par ticular with regar d to online activity . Diff erences in the level of prote ction of the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, in par ticular the r ight to the prot ection of personal data, with regard to the processing of personal data in the Member Stat es ma y prevent the free f lo w of personal data throughout the U nion. Those diffe rences ma y theref ore constitute an obstacle to the pursuit of economic activities at the level of the Union, distor t competition and impede author ities in the disc harge of their responsibilities under U nion law . Such a differ ence in levels of protection is due to the existen ce of differ ences in the im plementation and application of Directive 95/46/EC. (10) In order to ensure a consistent and high level of prot ection of natural persons and to remo ve the obstacles to f lo ws of personal data within the Union, the level of prot ection of the r ights and freedoms of natural persons with regar d to the processing of such data should be equivalent in all Member Stat es. Consisten t and homog enous application of the r ules f or the prote ction of the fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data should be ensured throughout the Uni on. Reg arding the processing of personal data f or compl iance with a legal oblig ation, f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inte rest or in the exer cise of offici al author ity vested in the controller , Member States should be allo wed to maintain or introduce national pro visions to fur ther specify the application of the r ules of this Regulation. In conjunction with the ge neral and hor izontal la w on data protection im plementing Directive 95/46/EC, Member State s hav e several sect or -specif ic laws in areas that need more specifi c pro visions. This Regulation also pro vides a margin of manoeuvre f or Member Stat es to specify its r ules, including f or the processing of special categor ies of personal data (sensitive data). T o that exte nt, this Regulation does not excl ude Member Stat e law that sets out the circumstances f or specifi c processing situations, including det er mining more precisely the conditions under which the processing of personal data is la wful. 4.5.2016 L 119/2 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (11) Effe ctive prote ction of personal data throughout the Union requires the strengthening and setting out in detail of the r ights of data subjects and the oblig ations of those who process and det er mine the processing of personal data, as well as equivalent po wers f or monitori ng and ensur ing compl iance with the r ules f or the prote ction of personal data and equivalent sanctions f or infr ing ements in the Member Stat es. (12) Ar ticle 16(2) TFEU mandates the European P arliament and the Council to la y do wn the r ules relating to the prot ection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and the r ules relating to the free mo vement of personal data. (13) In order to ensure a consistent level of protection f or natural persons throughout the Union and to prevent diverg ences hamp er ing the free mo vement of personal data within the inte r nal mark et, a Regulation is necessar y to pro vide leg al cer tainty and transparency f or economic operat ors, including micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises, and to pro vide natural persons in all Member States with the same level of lega lly enf orceable r ights and obligations and responsibilities f or controllers and processors, to ensure consistent monitoring of the processing of personal data, and equivalent sanctions in all Member Stat es as well as eff ective cooperation between the super visor y author ities of diffe rent Member States. The proper functioning of the internal mark et requires that the free mo vement of personal data within the U nion is not restr ict ed or prohibit ed f or reasons connecte d with the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data. T o take account of the specific situation of micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises, this Regulation includes a derog ation f or org anisations with f ewer than 250 emplo y ees with regar d to record-keeping. In addition, the U nion institutions and bodies, and Member Stat es and their super visor y author ities, are encourag ed to tak e account of the specifi c needs of micro, small and medium-sized enterpr ises in the application of this Regulation. The notion of micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises should dra w from Ar ticle 2 of the Annex to Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC ( 1 ). (14) The protection aff orded by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data. This Regulation does not co ver the processing of personal data which concer ns legal persons and in par ticular under takings established as leg al persons, including the name and the f or m of the leg al person and the contact details of the leg al person. (15) In order to prevent creating a ser ious r isk of circumvention, the prote ction of natural persons should be tec hnolo gically neutral and should not depend on the te chniques used. The prot ection of natural persons should apply to the processing of personal data by automat ed means, as well as to manual processing, if the personal data are contained or are inte nded to be contained in a f iling system. Files or sets of files, as well as their co ver pag es, whic h are not str uctured according to specifi c cr it er ia should not f all within the scope of this Regulation. (16) This Regulation does not apply to issues of prot ection of fundamental r ights and freedoms or the free f lo w of personal data relat ed to activities whic h fall outside the scope of Uni on law , such as activities concer ning national secur ity . This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data by the Member Stat es when car r ying out activities in relation to the common f oreign and secur ity policy of the U nion. (17) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ) applies to the processing of personal data by the U nion institutions, bodies, off ices and agencies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other U nion leg al acts applicable to such processing of personal data should be adapt ed to the pr inciples and r ules established in this Regulation and applied in the light of this Regulation. In order to pro vide a strong and coherent data prote ction framework in the Union, the necessar y adapta tions of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 should f ollo w af ter the adoptio n of this Regulation, in order to allo w application at the same time as this Regulation. (18) This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity and thus with no connection to a professional or commercial activity . Personal or 4.5.2016 L 119/3 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Commission Recommendation of 6 Ma y 2003 concer ning the definit ion of micro, small and mediumsized enterpr ises (C(2003) 1422) (OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European P arliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regar d to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free mo vement of such data (OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1). household activities could include cor respondence and the holding of addresses, or social netw orking and online activity under taken within the cont ext of such activities. Ho wever , this Regulation applies to controllers or processors which pro vide the means f or processing personal data f or such personal or household activities. (19) The protect ion of natural persons with regar d to the processing of personal data by compet ent author ities f or the pur poses of the prevention, investig ation, detec tion or prosecution of cr iminal offences or the executi on of cr iminal penalties, including the safeg uarding aga inst and the prevention of threats to public secur ity and the free mo vement of such data, is the subject of a specific Union legal act. This Regulation should not, theref ore, apply to processing activities f or those pur poses. Ho wever , personal data processed by public author ities under this Regulation should, when used f or those pur poses, be go ver ned by a more specific U nion leg al act, namely Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ). Member Stat es ma y entr ust compet ent author ities within the meaning of Directive (EU) 2016/680 with tasks which are not necessar ily car r ied out f or the pur poses of the prevention, inve stigation, detection or prosecution of cr iminal offe nces or the executi on of cr iminal penalties, including the safeguarding ag ainst and prevention of threats to public secur ity , so that the processing of personal data f or those other pur poses, in so far as it is within the scope of U nion la w , f alls within the scope of this Regulation. With regard to the processing of personal data by those compet ent author ities f or pur poses fa lling within scope of this Regulation, Member Stat es should be able to maintain or introduce more specifi c pro visions to adapt the application of the r ules of this Regulation. Such pro visions ma y det er mine more precisely specific requirements f or the processing of personal data by those compet ent author ities f or those other pur poses, taking into account the constitutional, org anisational and administrative str ucture of the respective Member State . When the processing of personal data by pr ivate bodies falls within the scope of this Regulation, this Regulation should pro vide f or the possibility f or Member Stat es under specifi c conditions to restr ict by la w cer tain oblig ations and r ights when such a restr iction constitute s a necessar y and propor tionat e measure in a democratic society to safeg uard specific im por tant interests including public secur ity and the prevention, inv estigation, detection or prosecution of cr iminal offe nces or the exe cution of cr iminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public secur ity . This is relevant f or instance in the framework of anti-money launder ing or the activities of f orensic laboratori es. (20) While this Regulation applies, inte r alia, to the activities of cour ts and other judicial author ities, U nion or Member State la w could specify the processing operations and processing procedures in relation to the processing of personal data by cour ts and other judicial author ities. The compe tence of the super visor y author ities should not co ver the processing of personal data when cour ts are acting in their judicial capacity , in order to safeg uard the independence of the judiciar y in the performa nce of its judicial tasks, including decisionmaking. It should be possible to entr ust super vision of such data processing operations to specific bodies within the judicial system of the Member State , which should, in par ticular ensure compl iance with the r ules of this Regulation, enhance awar eness among members of the judiciar y of their oblig ations under this Regulation and handle compl aints in relation to such data processing operations. (21) This Regulation is without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 2 ), in par ticular of the liability r ules of interm ediar y ser vice pro viders in Ar ticles 12 to 15 of that Directive. That Directive seeks to contr ibute to the proper functioning of the inte r nal mark et by ensur ing the free mo vement of inf or mation society ser vices between Member Stat es. (22) Any processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union should be car r ied out in accordance with this Regulation, regar dless of whether the processing itself take s place within the Union. Establishment implies the effective and real exe rcise of activity through stable ar rang ements. The leg al f or m of such ar rang ements, whether through a branch or a subsidiar y with a legal personality , is not the deter mining fact or in that respect. 4.5.2016 L 119/4 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 Apr il 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regar d t o the processing of personal data by compet ent author ities f or the pur poses of prevention, investig ation, detect ion or prosecution of cr iminal offences or the ex ecution of cr iminal penalties, and the free mo vement of such data and repealing Council Framewo rk Decision 2008/977/JHA (see page 89 of this Official Jour nal). ( 2 ) Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on cer tain lega l aspects of inf or mation society ser vices, in par ticular electronic commerce, in the Intern al Mark et (Directive on electronic commerce) (OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1). (23) In order to ensure that natural persons are not depr ived of the protection to which they are entitled under this Regulation, the processing of personal data of data subjects who are in the U nion by a controller or a processor not established in the U nion should be subject to this Regulation where the processing activities are related to offe r ing goods or ser vices to such data subjects ir respective of whether connect ed to a pa yment. In order to det er mine whether such a controller or processor is offer ing goods or ser vices to data subjects who are in the U nion, it should be ascer tained whether it is apparent that the controller or processor en visages offer ing ser vices to data subjects in one or more Member Stat es in the Union. Whereas the mere accessibility of the controller's, processor's or an interm ediar y's website in the Union, of an email address or of other contact details, or the use of a language generally used in the third countr y where the controller is established, is insufficient to ascer tain such intenti on, f actors such as the use of a language or a cur rency general ly used in one or more Member Stat es with the possibility of order ing goods and ser vices in that other languag e, or the mentioning of custome rs or users who are in the U nion, ma y make it apparent that the controller en visages offer ing goods or ser vices to data subjects in the U nion. (24) The processing of personal data of data subjects who are in the U nion by a controller or processor not established in the Union should also be subject to this Regulation when it is related to the monitori ng of the beha viour of such data subjects in so fa r as their behavi our takes place within the U nion. In order to det er mine whether a processing activity can be considered to monit or the beha viour of data subjects, it should be ascer tained whether natural persons are trac ked on the intern et including potential subsequent use of personal data processing tec hniques which consist of prof iling a natural person, par ticularly in order to tak e decisions concer ning her or him or f or analysing or predicting her or his personal preferences, beha viours and attitudes. (25) Where Member Stat e la w applies by vir tue of public inte r national law , this Regulation should also apply to a controller not established in the U nion, such as in a Member State 's diplomatic mission or consular post. (26) The pr inciples of data prote ction should apply to an y inf or mation concer ning an identif ied or identifiable natural person. P ersonal data which have undergone pseudon ymisation, whic h could be attr ibuted to a natural person by the use of additional inf or mation should be considered to be inf or mation on an identif iable natural person. T o det er mine whether a natural person is identifiable, account should be taken of all the means reasonably like ly to be used, such as sing ling out, either by the controller or by another person to identify the natural person directly or indirectly . T o ascer tain whether means are reasonably likely to be used to identify the natural person, account should be taken of all objective fa ctors, such as the costs of and the amount of time required f or identif ication, taking into consideration the av ailable tec hnology at the time of the processing and tec hnological developments. The pr inciples of data protection should theref ore not apply to anonymous inf or mation, namely inf or mation whic h does not relate to an identified or identif iable natural person or to personal data rendered anonym ous in such a manner that the data subject is not or no long er identifiable. This Regulation does not theref ore concer n the processing of such anony mous inf or mation, including f or statistical or research pur poses. (27) This Regulation does not apply to the personal data of deceased persons. Member States ma y pro vide f or r ules regar ding the processing of personal data of deceased persons. (28) The application of pseudonymisation to personal data can reduce the r isks to the data subjects concer ned and help controllers and processors to meet their data-protection oblig ations. The explicit introduction of pseudon y misation in this Regulation is not intended to preclude any other measures of data prote ction. (29) In order to creat e incentives to apply pseudonymisation when processing personal data, measures of pseudony mi sation should, whilst allo wing general analysis, be possible within the same controller when that controller has take n tec hnical and org anisational measures necessar y to ensure, f or the processing concer ned, that this Regulation is implement ed, and that additional inf or mation f or attr ibuting the personal data to a specifi c data subject is kep t separately . The controller processing the personal data should indicate the author ised persons within the same controller . 4.5.2016 L 119/5 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (30) Natural persons ma y be associated with online identif iers pro vided by their devices, applications, too ls and prot ocols, such as internet protocol addresses, cookie identif iers or other identif iers such as radio frequency identification tags. This ma y leave traces which, in par ticular when combined with unique identifiers and other inf or mation received by the ser vers, ma y be used to creat e profiles of the natural persons and identify them. (31) Public author ities to which personal data are disclosed in accordance with a legal oblig ation f or the exer cise of their off icial mission, such as tax and customs author ities, fi nancial investig ation units, independent adminis trative author ities, or fi nancial mark et author ities responsible f or the regulation and super vision of secur ities mark ets should not be regar ded as recipients if they receive personal data whic h are necessar y to car r y out a par ticular inquir y in the general inter est, in accordance with U nion or Member State la w . The requests f or disclosure sent by the public author ities should alwa ys be in wr iting, reasoned and occasional and should not concer n the entirety of a fi ling system or lead to the interconnection of fi ling systems. The processing of personal data by those public author ities should compl y with the applicable data-protection r ules according to the pur poses of the processing. (32) Consent should be given by a clear affi r mative act establishing a freely given, specifi c, inf or med and unambiguous indication of the data subject's agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her , such as by a wr itten state ment, including by electronic means, or an oral statement. This could include ticking a bo x when visiting an intern et website, c hoosing te chnical settings f or inf or mation society ser vices or another stat ement or conduct whic h clearly indicates in this conte xt the data subject's accept ance of the proposed processing of his or her personal data. Silence, pre-tick ed bo x es or inactivity should not theref ore constitute consent. Consent should co ver all processing activities car r ied out f or the same pur pose or pur poses. When the processing has multiple pur poses, consent should be given f or all of them. If the data subject's consent is to be given f ollo wing a request by electronic means, the request must be clear , concise and not unnecessar ily disr upti ve to the use of the ser vice f or which it is pro vided. (33) It is of ten not possible to fully identify the pur pose of personal data processing f or scientifi c researc h pur poses at the time of data collection. Theref ore, data subjects should be allo wed to give their consent to cer tain areas of scientific researc h when in keeping with recognised ethical standards f or scientific research. Data subjects should hav e the oppor tunity to give their consent only to cer tain areas of research or par ts of research projects to the exte nt allo wed by the intende d pur pose. (34) Genetic data should be defined as personal data relating to the inher it ed or acquired genetic c haract er istics of a natural person whic h result from the analysis of a biological sample from the natural person in question, in par ticular c hromosomal, deo xyr ibonucleic acid (DNA) or r ibonucleic acid (RNA) analysis, or from the analysis of another element enabling equivalent inf or mation to be obtained. (35) P ersonal data concer ning health should include all data per taining to the health status of a data subject which reveal inf or mation relating to the past, cur rent or future phy sical or mental health status of the data subject. This includes inf or mation about the natural person collect ed in the course of the registration f or , or the pro vision of, health care ser vices as refer red to in Directive 2011/24/EU of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ) to that natural person; a number , symbol or par ticular assigned to a natural person to uniquely identify the natural person f or health pur poses; inf or mation der ived from the testing or examination of a body par t or bodily substance, including from genetic data and biological sam ples; and an y inf or mation on, f or example, a disease, disability , disease r isk, medical histo r y , clinical treatment or the physiological or biomedical stat e of the data subject independent of its source, f or example from a phy sician or other health profess ional, a hospital, a medical device or an in vitro diagnostic test. (36) The main establishment of a controller in the U nion should be the place of its central administration in the U nion, unless the decisions on the pur poses and means of the processing of personal data are taken in another establishment of the controller in the Union, in whic h case that other establishment should be considered to be 4.5.2016 L 119/6 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Directive 2011/24/EU of the European P arliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients' r ights in crossborder healthcare (OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 45). the main establishment. The main establishment of a controller in the U nion should be det er mined according to objective cr it er ia and should imply the eff ective and real exercise of manag ement activities determi ning the main decisions as to the pur poses and means of processing through stable ar rangements. That cr it er ion should not depend on whether the processing of personal data is car r ied out at that location. The presence and use of tec hnical means and te chnologies f or processing personal data or processing activities do not, in themselves, constitut e a main establishment and are theref ore not det er mining cr ite r ia f or a main establishment. The main establishment of the processor should be the place of its central administration in the U nion or , if it has no central administration in the U nion, the place where the main processing activities take place in the U nion. In cases inv olving both the controller and the processor , the compe tent lead super visor y author ity should remain the super visor y author ity of the Member State where the controller has its main establishment, but the super visor y author ity of the processor should be considered to be a super visor y author ity concer ned and that super visor y author ity should par ticipate in the cooperation procedure pro vided f or by this Regulation. In an y case, the super visor y author ities of the Member State or Member Stat es where the processor has one or more establishments should not be considered to be super visor y author ities concer ned where the draf t decision concer ns only the controller . Where the processing is car r ied out by a group of under takings, the main establishment of the controlling under taking should be considered to be the main establishment of the group of under takings, excep t where the pur poses and means of processing are deter mined by another under taking. (37) A group of under takings should co ver a controlling under taking and its controlled under takings, whereby the controlling under taking should be the under taking which can exer t a dominant inf luence o ver the other under takings by vir tue, f or example, of o wnership, financial par ticipation or the r ules which go ver n it or the po wer to hav e personal data prote ction r ules im plemented. An under taking which controls the processing of personal data in under takings aff iliated to it should be regarded, tog ether with those under takings, as a group of under takings. (38) Children mer it specific protection with rega rd to their personal data, as they ma y be less aware of the r isks, consequences and safeg uards concer ned and their r ights in relation to the processing of personal data. Such specific protection should, in par ticular , apply to the use of personal data of c hildren f or the pur poses of mark eting or creating personality or user profiles and the collection of personal data with regard to c hildren when using ser vices offered directly to a c hild. The consent of the holder of parental responsibility should not be necessar y in the context of preventive or counselling ser vices offe red directly to a c hild. (39) Any processing of personal data should be la wful and fa ir . It should be transparent to natural persons that personal data concer ning them are collect ed, used, consulte d or other wise processed and to what extent the personal data are or will be processed. The pr inciple of transparency requires that any inf or mation and communi cation relating to the processing of those personal data be easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain language be used. That pr inciple concer ns, in par ticular , inf or mation to the data subjects on the identity of the controller and the pur poses of the processing and fur ther inf or mation to ensure f air and transparent processing in respect of the natural persons concer ned and their r ight to obtain conf ir mation and communication of personal data concer ning them whic h are being processed. Natural persons should be made awar e of r isks , r ules, safeg uards and r ights in relation to the processing of personal data and ho w to exer cise their r ights in relation to such processing. In par ticular , the specific pur poses f or which personal data are processed should be explicit and legitimate and det er mined at the time of the collection of the personal data. The personal data should be adequate, relevant and limite d to what is necessar y f or the pur poses f or whic h they are processed. This requires, in par ticular , ensur ing that the per iod f or whic h the personal data are stor ed is limited to a str ict minimum. P ersonal data should be processed only if the pur pose of the processing could not reasonably be fulfilled by other means. In order to ensure that the personal data are not kep t longer than necessar y , time limits should be established by the controller f or erasure or f or a per iodic review . Ever y reasonable ste p should be take n to ensure that personal data which are inaccurat e are rectified or deleted. P ersonal data should be processed in a manner that ensures appropr iat e secur ity and conf identiality of the personal data, including f or preventing unauthor ised access to or use of personal data and the equipment used f or the processing. (40) In order f or processing to be la wful, personal data should be processed on the basis of the consent of the data subject concer ned or some other legitimate basis, laid do wn by law , either in this Regulation or in other U nion or 4.5.2016 L 119/7 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Member Stat e la w as refer red to in this Regulation, including the necessity f or compl iance with the legal oblig ation to which the controller is subject or the necessity f or the per f or mance of a contract to which the data subject is par ty or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject pr ior to ent er ing into a contract. (41) Where this Regulation refers to a legal basis or a legislative measure, this does not necessar ily require a legislative act adopt ed by a parliament, without prejudice to requirements pursuant to the constitutional order of the Member Stat e concer ned. Ho wever , such a lega l basis or legislative measure should be clear and precise and its application should be f oreseeable to persons subject to it, in accordance with the case-law of the Cour t of Justice of the European Uni on (the Cour t of Justice) and the European Cour t of Human Rights. (42) Where processing is based on the data subject's consent, the controller should be able to demonstrate that the data subject has given consent to the processing operation. In par ticular in the context of a wr itt en declaration on another matt er , safeg uards should ensure that the data subject is awar e of the fact that and the extent to whic h consent is given. In accordance with Council Directive 93/13/EEC ( 1 ) a declaration of consent pref or mulate d by the controller should be pro vided in an intelligible and easily accessible f or m, using clear and plain languag e and it should not contain unfair te r ms. For consent to be inf or med, the data subject should be aware at least of the identity of the controller and the pur poses of the processing f or which the personal data are intende d. Consent should not be regar ded as freely given if the data subject has no genuine or free choice or is unable to refuse or withdraw consent without detr iment. (43) In order to ensure that consent is freely given, consent should not pro vide a valid legal ground f or the processing of personal data in a specifi c case where there is a clear imbalance between the data subject and the controller , in par ticular where the controller is a public author ity and it is theref ore unlikely that consent was freely given in all the circumstances of that specifi c situation. Consent is presumed not to be freely given if it does not allo w separate consent to be given to differ ent personal data processing operations despit e it being appropr iate in the individual case, or if the perf or mance of a contract, including the pro vision of a ser vice, is dependent on the consent despite such consent not being necessar y f or such performa nce. (44) Processing should be la wful where it is necessar y in the cont ext of a contract or the intention to ent er into a contract. (45) Where processing is car r ied out in accordance with a legal oblig ation to whic h the controller is subject or where processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exer cise of official author ity , the processing should hav e a basis in Uni on or Member State la w . This Regulation does not require a specific la w f or each individual processing. A la w as a basis f or several processing operations based on a leg al oblig ation to whic h the controller is subject or where processing is necessar y f or the perf or mance of a task car r ied out in the public interest or in the exer cise of an official author ity ma y be sufficient. It should also be f or U nion or Member State la w to det er mine the pur pose of processing. Fur ther more, that law could specify the g eneral conditions of this Regulation go ver ning the lawfulness of personal data processing, establish specif ications f or det er mining the controller , the type of personal data whic h are subject to the processing, the data subjects concer ned, the entities to which the personal data ma y be disclosed, the pur pose limitations, the storag e per iod and other measures to ensure lawful and fair processing. It should also be f or U nion or Member Stat e la w to det er mine whether the controller performing a task car r ied out in the public inte rest or in the exer cise of off icial author ity should be a public author ity or another natural or leg al person go ver ned by public la w , or , where it is in the public inter est to do so, including f or health pur poses such as public health and social protection and the manag ement of health care ser vices, by pr ivate law , such as a professional association. (46) The processing of personal data should also be regarded to be la wful where it is necessar y to prote ct an inter est whic h is essential f or the life of the data subject or that of another natural person. Processing of personal data 4.5.2016 L 119/8 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 Apr il 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts (OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29). based on the vital inter est of another natural person should in pr inciple take place only where the processing cannot be manifest ly based on another legal basis. Some types of processing ma y ser ve both impor tant grounds of public interest and the vital inter ests of the data subject as f or instance when processing is necessar y f or humanitar ian pur poses, including f or monitori ng epidemics and their spread or in situations of humanitar ian emerg encies, in par ticular in situations of natural and man-made disasters. (47) The legitimate inter ests of a controller , including those of a controller to which the personal data ma y be disclosed, or of a third par ty , ma y pro vide a legal basis f or processing, pro vided that the inte rests or the fundamental r ights and freedoms of the data subject are not o ver r iding, taking into consideration the reasonable expectations of data subjects based on their relationship with the controller . Such legitimate interest could exist f or example where there is a relevant and appropr iat e relationship between the data subject and the controller in situations such as where the data subject is a client or in the ser vice of the controller . A t any rate the existen ce of a legitimate inte rest would need careful assessment including whether a data subject can reasonably expect at the time and in the cont ext of the collection of the personal data that processing f or that pur pose ma y take place. The inter ests and fundamental r ights of the data subject could in par ticular o ver r ide the inter est of the data controller where personal data are processed in circumstances where data subjects do not reasonably expect fur ther processing. Given that it is f or the legislator to pro vide by law f or the legal basis f or public author ities to process personal data, that legal basis should not apply to the processing by public author ities in the performa nce of their tasks. The processing of personal data str ictly necessar y f or the pur poses of preventing fraud also constitutes a legitimate inte rest of the data controller concer ned. The processing of personal data f or direct mark eting pur poses ma y be regarded as car r ied out f or a legitimate inter est. (48) Controllers that are par t of a group of under takings or institutions affiliated to a central body ma y hav e a legitimate inter est in transmitting personal data within the group of under takings f or int er nal administrative pur poses, including the processing of clients' or em plo ye es' personal data. The general pr inciples f or the transfe r of personal data, within a group of under takings, to an under taking locat ed in a third countr y remain unaffect ed. (49) The processing of personal data to the ext ent str ictly necessar y and propor tionate f or the pur poses of ensur ing netw ork and inf or mation secur ity , i.e. the ability of a network or an inf or mation syste m to resist, at a given level of conf idence, accidental events or unlawful or malicious actions that compromise the availabi lity , authenticity , integrity and confidentiality of store d or transmitte d personal data, and the secur ity of the related ser vices offered by , or accessible via, those netw orks and systems, by public author ities, by comput er emerge ncy response te ams (CERT s), comput er secur ity incident response teams (CSIRT s), by pro viders of electronic communications netw orks and ser vices and by pro viders of secur ity tec hnologies and ser vices, constitutes a legitimat e interest of the data controller concer ned. This could, f or exam ple, include preventing unauthor ised access to electronic communications netw orks and malicious code distr ibution and stoppi ng denial of ser vice attacks and damage to comput er and electronic communication systems. (50) The processing of personal data f or pur poses other than those f or which the personal data were initially collect ed should be allo wed only where the processing is compatible with the pur poses f or which the personal data were initially collect ed. In such a case, no lega l basis separate from that whic h allo wed the collection of the personal data is required. If the processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inte rest or in the exer cise of off icial author ity vested in the controller , Union or Member Stat e la w ma y det er mine and specify the tasks and pur poses f or whic h the fur ther processing should be regar ded as compati ble and la wful. Fur ther processing f or archiv ing pur poses in the public inter est, scientific or histor ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses should be considered to be compati ble lawful processing operations. The legal basis pro vided by U nion or Member State law f or the processing of personal data ma y also pro vide a lega l basis f or fur ther processing. In order to ascer tain whether a pur pose of fur ther processing is compati ble with the pur pose f or whic h the personal data are initially collect ed, the controller , af ter having met all the requirements f or the la wfulness of the or iginal processing, should take into account, inter alia: any link between those pur poses and the pur poses of the intende d fur ther processing; the context in whic h the personal data have been collected, in par ticular the reasonable expectations of data subjects based on their relationship with the controller as to their 4.5.2016 L 119/9 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN fur ther use; the nature of the personal data; the consequences of the intended fur ther processing f or data subjects; and the existen ce of appropr iat e safeguards in both the or iginal and intended fur ther processing operations. Where the data subject has given consent or the processing is based on U nion or Member Stat e la w which constitut es a necessar y and propor tionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard, in par ticular , impor tant objectives of general public interest, the controller should be allo wed to fur ther process the personal data ir respective of the compatibility of the pur poses. In any case, the application of the pr inciples set out in this Regulation and in par ticular the inf or mation of the data subject on those other pur poses and on his or her r ights including the r ight to object, should be ensured. Indicating possible cr iminal acts or threats to public secur ity by the controller and transmitting the relevant personal data in individual cases or in several cases relating to the same cr iminal act or threats to public secur ity to a compet ent author ity should be regarded as being in the legitimate interest pursued by the controller . Ho wever , such transmission in the legitimate inte rest of the controller or fur ther processing of personal data should be prohibit ed if the processing is not compat ible with a leg al, profess ional or other binding oblig ation of secrecy . (51) P ersonal data whic h are, by their nature, par ticularly sensitive in relation to fundamental r ights and freedoms mer it specific protection as the context of their processing could creat e signif icant r isks to the fundamental r ights and freedoms. Those personal data should include personal data revealing racial or ethnic or igin, whereby the use of the term racial or igin in this Regulation does not im ply an acceptance by the U nion of theor ies which atte mp t to det er mine the existence of separate human races. The processing of photog raphs should not systemati cally be considered to be processing of special cate gor ies of personal data as they are co vered by the definit ion of biometr ic data only when processed through a specifi c tec hnical means allo wing the unique identif ication or authentication of a natural person. Such personal data should not be processed, unless processing is allo wed in specific cases set out in this Regulation, taking into account that Member Stat es law ma y la y do wn specific pro visions on data protection in order to adapt the application of the r ules of this Regulation f or compl iance with a leg al oblig ation or f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public interest or in the exercise of official author ity vested in the controller . In addition to the specific requirements f or such processing, the g eneral pr inciples and other r ules of this Regulation should apply , in par ticular as regar ds the conditions f or la wful processing. Derog ations from the ge neral prohibition f or processing such special catego r ies of personal data should be explicitly pro vided, inter alia, where the data subject gives his or her explicit consent or in respect of specific needs in par ticular where the processing is car r ied out in the course of legitimate activities by cer tain associations or f oundations the pur pose of whic h is to per mit the exe rcise of fundamental freedoms. (52) Derog ating from the prohibition on processing special categor ies of personal data should also be allo wed when pro vided f or in Union or Member State law and subject to suitable safeg uards, so as to protect personal data and other fundamental r ights, where it is in the public inter est to do so, in par ticular processing personal data in the field of emplo yment la w , social protect ion la w including pensions and f or health secur ity , monitoring and aler t pur poses, the prevention or control of communicable diseases and other ser ious threats to health. Such a deroga tion ma y be made f or health pur poses, including public health and the manag ement of health-care ser vices, especially in order to ensure the quality and cost-eff ectiveness of the procedures used f or settling claims f or benefits and ser vices in the health insurance system , or f or arc hiving pur poses in the public inter est, scientifi c or histor ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses. A derog ation should also allo w the processing of such personal data where necessar y f or the establishment, exe rcise or defe nce of leg al claims, whether in cour t proceedings or in an administrative or out-of-cour t procedure. (53) Special cate gor ies of personal data whic h mer it higher prote ction should be processed f or health-related pur poses only where necessar y to achieve those pur poses f or the benefit of natural persons and society as a whole, in par ticular in the context of the management of health or social care ser vices and syste ms, including processing by the management and central national health author ities of such data f or the pur pose of quality control, manag ement inf or mation and the general national and local super vision of the health or social care system , and ensur ing continuity of health or social care and cross-border healthcare or health secur ity , monitori ng and aler t pur poses, or f or archiving pur poses in the public inter est, scientific or histo r ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses, based on U nion or Member Stat e law whic h has to meet an objective of public int erest, as well as f or studies conduct ed in the public inte rest in the area of public health. Theref ore, this Regulation should pro vide f or har monised conditions f or the processing of special categor ies of personal data concer ning health, in respect of specific needs, in par ticular where the processing of such data is car r ied out f or cer tain health-relat ed pur poses 4.5.2016 L 119/10 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN by persons subject to a legal oblig ation of professional secrecy . U nion or Member State law should pro vide f or specific and suitable measures so as to prote ct the fundamental r ights and the personal data of natural persons. Member State s should be allo wed to maintain or introduce fur ther conditions, including limitations, with rega rd to the processing of ge netic data, biometr ic data or data concer ning health. Ho wever , this should not ham per the free f lo w of personal data within the Union when those conditions apply to cross-border processing of such data. (54) The processing of special catego r ies of personal data ma y be necessar y f or reasons of public inte rest in the areas of public health without consent of the data subject. Such processing should be subject to suitable and specifi c measures so as to prot ect the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. In that context, public health should be interpreted as def ined in Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ), namely all elements related to health, namely health status, including morbidity and disability , the det er minants hav ing an effect on that health status, health care needs, resources allocated to health care, the pro vision of, and universal access to, health care as well as health care expenditure and financing, and the causes of mor tality . Such processing of data concer ning health f or reasons of public inter est should not result in personal data being processed f or other pur poses by third par ties such as emplo yers or insurance and banking companies. (55) Moreo ver , the processing of personal data by official author ities f or the pur pose of achieving the aims, laid do wn by constitutional la w or by intern ational public la w , of officially recognised religious associations, is car r ied out on grounds of public interest. (56) Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system in a Member Stat e requires that political par ties compile personal data on people's political opinions, the processing of such data ma y be per mitted f or reasons of public interest, pro vided that appropr iat e safeg uards are established. (57) If the personal data processed by a controller do not per mit the controller to identify a natural person, the data controller should not be oblig ed to acquire additional inf or mation in order to identify the data subject f or the sole pur pose of compl ying with any pro vision of this Regulation. Ho wever , the controller should not refuse to take additional inf or mation pro vided by the data subject in order to suppor t the exer cise of his or her r ights. Identification should include the digital identif ication of a data subject, f or example through authentication mech anism such as the same credentials, used by the data subject to log-in to the on-line ser vice offered by the data controller . (58) The pr inciple of transparency requires that an y inf or mation addressed to the public or to the data subject be concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and plain language and, additionally , where appropr iate, visualisation be used. Such inf or mation could be pro vided in electronic f or m, f or examp le, when addressed to the public, through a website. This is of par ticular relevance in situations where the prolife ration of actors and the tec hnological complexity of practice make it difficult f or the data subject to kno w and understand whether , by whom and f or what pur pose personal data relating to him or her are being collect ed, such as in the case of online adver tising. Given that c hildren mer it specifi c protection, any inf or mation and communication, where processing is addressed to a child, should be in such a clear and plain language that the c hild can easily understand. (59) Modalities should be pro vided f or facilitating the exe rcise of the data subject's r ights under this Regulation, including mech anisms to request and, if applicable, obtain, free of c harge, in par ticular , access to and rectification or erasure of personal data and the exercise of the r ight to object. The controller should also pro vide means f or requests to be made electronically , especially where personal data are processed by electronic means. The controller should be oblig ed to respond to requests from the data subject without undue dela y and at the latest within one month and to give reasons where the controller does not inte nd to compl y with an y such requests. 4.5.2016 L 119/11 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on Community statistics on public health and health and safety at work (OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 70). (60) The pr inciples of fair and transparent processing require that the data subject be inf or med of the existen ce of the processing operation and its pur poses. The controller should pro vide the data subject with an y fur ther inf or mation necessar y to ensure f air and transparent processing taking into account the specific circumstances and cont ext in whic h the personal data are processed. Fur ther more, the data subject should be inf or med of the existen ce of profiling and the consequences of such prof iling. Where the personal data are collect ed from the data subject, the data subject should also be inf or med whether he or she is oblig ed to pro vide the personal data and of the consequences, where he or she does not pro vide such data. That inf or mation ma y be pro vided in combination with standardised icons in order to give in an easily visible, intelligible and clearly legible manner , a meaningful o ver view of the intende d processing. Where the icons are presented electronically , they should be machi ne-readable. (61) The inf or mation in relation to the processing of personal data relating to the data subject should be given to him or her at the time of collection from the data subject, or , where the personal data are obtained from another source, within a reasonable per iod, depending on the circumstances of the case. Where personal data can be legitimate ly disclosed to another recipient, the data subject should be inf or med when the personal data are fi rst disclosed to the recipient. Where the controller intends to process the personal data f or a pur pose other than that f or whic h they were collected, the controller should pro vide the data subject pr ior to that fur ther processing with inf or mation on that other pur pose and other necessar y inf or mation. Where the or igin of the personal data cannot be pro vided to the data subject because var ious sources hav e been used, general inf or mation should be pro vided. (62) Ho wever , it is not necessar y to imp ose the oblig ation to pro vide inf or mation where the data subject already possesses the inf or mation, where the recording or disclosure of the personal data is expressly laid do wn by law or where the pro vision of inf or mation to the data subject pro ves to be imp ossible or w ould inv olve a dispropor tionate eff or t. The latter could in par ticular be the case where processing is car r ied out f or archiving pur poses in the public inte rest, scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses. In that regard, the number of data subjects, the age of the data and an y appropr iat e safeg uards adopt ed should be take n into consideration. (63) A data subject should have the r ight of access to personal data whic h have been collect ed concer ning him or her , and to exercise that r ight easily and at reasonable inter vals, in order to be awar e of, and ver ify , the la wfulness of the processing. This includes the r ight f or data subjects to hav e access to data concer ning their health, f or examp le the data in their medical records containing inf or mation such as diagnoses, examination results, assessments by treating phy sicians and any treatment or inter ventions pro vided. Ever y data subject should theref ore hav e the r ight to kno w and obtain communication in par ticular with regar d to the pur poses f or whic h the personal data are processed, where possible the per iod f or whic h the personal data are processed, the recipients of the personal data, the logic inv olved in an y autom atic personal data processing and, at least when based on profiling, the consequences of such processing. Where possible, the controller should be able to pro vide remot e access to a secure system which w ould pro vide the data subject with direct access to his or her personal data. That r ight should not adversely affect the r ights or freedoms of others, including trade secrets or inte llectual proper ty and in par ticular the cop yr ight protecting the sof tware. Ho wever , the result of those considerations should not be a refusal to pro vide all inf or mation to the data subject. Where the controller processes a larg e quantity of inf or mation concer ning the data subject, the controller should be able to request that, bef ore the inf or mation is delivered, the data subject specify the inf or mation or processing activities to whic h the request relat es. (64) The controller should use all reasonable measures to ver ify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in par ticular in the conte xt of online ser vices and online identif iers. A controller should not retain personal data f or the sole pur pose of being able to react to potential requests. (65) A data subject should hav e the r ight to hav e personal data concer ning him or her rectified and a r ight to be f orgotte n where the retention of such data infr ing es this Regulation or U nion or Member Stat e law to which the controller is subject. In par ticular , a data subject should have the r ight to hav e his or her personal data erased and no longer processed where the personal data are no long er necessar y in relation to the pur poses f or which the y are collected or other wise processed, where a data subject has withdrawn his or her consent or objects to the processing of personal data concer ning him or her , or where the processing of his or her personal data does not other wise compl y with this Regulation. That r ight is relevant in par ticular where the data subject has given 4.5.2016 L 119/12 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN his or her consent as a c hild and is not fully awar e of the r isks inv olved by the processing, and later wants to remo ve such personal data, especially on the intern et. The data subject should be able to exercise that r ight notwithstanding the fact that he or she is no long er a c hild. Ho wever , the fur ther ret ention of the personal data should be la wful where it is necessar y , f or exercisi ng the r ight of freedom of expression and inf or mation, f or compl iance with a legal oblig ation, f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exer cise of official author ity vested in the controller , on the grounds of public inter est in the area of public health, f or arc hiving pur poses in the public interest, scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses, or f or the establishment, exercise or defence of leg al claims. (66) T o strengthen the r ight to be f orgotten in the online environment, the r ight to erasure should also be exte nded in such a wa y that a controller who has made the personal data public should be oblig ed to inf or m the controllers whic h are processing such personal data to erase an y links to, or copies or replications of those personal data. In doing so, that controller should take reasonable step s, taking into account available tec hnology and the means av ailable to the controller , including tec hnical measures, to inf or m the controllers which are processing the personal data of the data subject's request. (67) Methods by whic h to restr ict the processing of personal data could include, inter alia, te mporar ily mo ving the select ed data to another processing system, making the selecte d personal data unavai lable to users, or te mporar ily remo ving published data from a website . In autom ated fi ling syste ms, the restr iction of processing should in pr inciple be ensured by tec hnical means in such a manner that the personal data are not subject to fur ther processing operations and cannot be chang ed. The fa ct that the processing of personal data is restr icted should be clearly indicated in the system. (68) T o fur ther strengthen the control o ver his or her o wn data, where the processing of personal data is car r ied out by automat ed means, the data subject should also be allo wed to receive personal data concer ning him or her whic h he or she has pro vided to a controller in a str uctured, commonly used, machi ne-readable and inter operable f or mat, and to transmit it to another controller . Data controllers should be encourag ed to develop inte roperable f or mats that enable data por tability . That r ight should apply where the data subject pro vided the personal data on the basis of his or her consent or the processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a contract. It should not apply where processing is based on a legal ground other than consent or contract. By its ver y nature, that r ight should not be exercised ag ainst controllers processing personal data in the exer cise of their public duties. It should theref ore not apply where the processing of the personal data is necessar y f or compl iance with a lega l oblig ation to which the controller is subject or f or the performance of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exer cise of an official author ity vested in the controller . The data subject's r ight to transmit or receive personal data concer ning him or her should not creat e an obligation f or the controllers to adopt or maintain processing systems which are tec hnically compati ble. Where, in a cer tain set of personal data, more than one data subject is concer ned, the r ight to receive the personal data should be without prejudice to the r ights and freedoms of other data subjects in accordance with this Regulation. Fur ther more, that r ight should not prejudice the r ight of the data subject to obtain the erasure of personal data and the limitations of that r ight as set out in this Regulation and should, in par ticular , not imply the erasure of personal data concer ning the data subject whic h ha ve been pro vided by him or her f or the per f or mance of a contract to the exte nt that and f or as long as the personal data are necessar y f or the performa nce of that contract. Where tec hnically fe asible, the data subject should hav e the r ight to have the personal data transmitte d directly from one controller to another . (69) Where personal data might la wfully be processed because processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exercise of off icial author ity vested in the controller , or on grounds of the legitimate inter ests of a controller or a third par ty , a data subject should, never theless, be entitled to object to the processing of any personal data relating to his or her par ticular situation. It should be f or the controller to demonstrate that its compelling legitimate inter est o ver r ides the interests or the fundamental r ights and freedoms of the data subject. (70) Where personal data are processed f or the pur poses of direct mark eting, the data subject should have the r ight to object to such processing, including prof iling to the exte nt that it is related to such direct mark eting, whether with regard to initial or fur ther processing, at an y time and free of c harge. That r ight should be explicitly brought to the atte ntion of the data subject and present ed clearly and separate ly from any other inf or mation. 4.5.2016 L 119/13 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (71) The data subject should hav e the r ight not to be subject to a decision, which ma y include a measure, evaluating personal aspects relating to him or her whic h is based solely on automat ed processing and which produces lega l eff ects concer ning him or her or similarly signif icantly affect s him or her , such as automatic refusal of an online credit application or e-recr uiting practices without any human inte r vention. Such processing includes profiling that consists of an y f or m of automat ed processing of personal data evaluating the personal aspects relating to a natural person, in par ticular to analyse or predict aspects concer ning the data subject's performa nce at work, economic situation, health, personal pref erences or interests, reliability or beha viour , location or mo vements, where it produces leg al eff ects concer ning him or her or similarly signif icantly affect s him or her . Ho wever , decision-making based on such processing, including profiling, should be allo wed where expressly author ised by U nion or Member State la w to which the controller is subject, including f or fraud and tax-evasion monitori ng and prevention pur poses conduct ed in accordance with the regulations, standards and recommendations of U nion institutions or national o versight bodies and to ensure the secur ity and reliability of a ser vice pro vided by the controller , or necessar y f or the ent er ing or performa nce of a contract between the data subject and a controller , or when the data subject has given his or her explicit consent. In any case, such processing should be subject to suitable safeg uards, which should include specific inf or mation to the data subject and the r ight to obtain human inter vention, to express his or her point of view , to obtain an explanation of the decision reach ed af ter such assessment and to c hallenge the decision. Such measure should not concer n a c hild. In order to ensure fair and transparent processing in respect of the data subject, taking into account the specif ic circumstances and context in whic h the personal data are processed, the controller should use appropr iat e mathematical or statistical procedures f or the prof iling, implement tec hnical and org anisational measures appropr iate to ensure, in par ticular , that fact ors whic h result in inaccuracies in personal data are cor rect ed and the r isk of er rors is minimised, secure personal data in a manner that tak es account of the pote ntial r isks inv olved f or the inte rests and r ights of the data subject and that prevents, inte r alia, discr iminato r y effects on natural persons on the basis of racial or ethnic or igin, political opinion, religion or beliefs, trade union membership, ge netic or health status or sexual or ientation, or that result in measures hav ing such an effe ct. A utomat ed decision-making and prof iling based on special catego r ies of personal data should be allo wed only under specifi c conditions. (72) Profiling is subject to the r ules of this Regulation go ver ning the processing of personal data, such as the legal grounds f or processing or data protection pr inciples. The European Data Protect ion Board established by this Regulation (the Board) should be able to issue guidance in that conte xt. (73) Restr ictions concer ning specifi c pr inciples and the r ights of inf or mation, access to and rectification or erasure of personal data, the r ight to data por tability , the r ight to object, decisions based on profiling, as well as the communication of a personal data breach to a data subject and cer tain related oblig ations of the controllers ma y be imposed by U nion or Member State law , as far as necessar y and propor tionate in a democratic society to safeg uard public secur ity , including the prot ection of human life especially in response to natural or manmade disaste rs, the prevention, investig ation and prosecution of cr iminal offe nces or the executi on of cr iminal penalties, including the safeguarding aga inst and the prevention of threats to public secur ity , or of breaches of ethics f or regulated profe ssions, other impor tant objectives of general public inter est of the U nion or of a Member State, in par ticular an impor tant economic or financial interest of the Union or of a Member State, the kee ping of public register s kep t f or reasons of general public inter est, fur ther processing of archived personal data to pro vide specific inf or mation related to the political beha viour under f or mer totalitar ian state regimes or the prot ection of the data subject or the r ights and freedoms of others, including social protection, public health and humanitar ian pur poses. Those restr ictions should be in accordance with the requirements set out in the Char ter and in the European Conv ention f or the Prote ction of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. (74) The responsibility and liability of the controller f or any processing of personal data car r ied out by the controller or on the controller's behalf should be established. In par ticular , the controller should be obliged to im plement appropr iate and eff ective measures and be able to demonstrate the compl iance of processing activities with this Regulation, including the effe ctiveness of the measures. Those measures should take into account the nature, scope, conte xt and pur poses of the processing and the r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. 4.5.2016 L 119/14 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (75) The r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, of var ying lik elihood and sever ity , ma y result from personal data processing whic h could lead to phy sical, mater ial or non-materi al damag e, in par ticular: where the processing ma y give r ise to discr imination, identity thef t or fraud, financial loss, damage to the reputation, loss of confidentiality of personal data prot ected by profess ional secrecy , unauthor ised reversal of pseudon ymisation, or an y other significant economic or social disadvantag e; where data subjects might be depr ived of their r ights and freedoms or prevented from exercisi ng control o ver their personal data; where personal data are processed which reveal racial or ethnic or igin, political opinions, religion or philosophical beliefs, trade union membership, and the processing of genetic data, data concer ning health or data concer ning sex life or cr iminal convictions and offe nces or relat ed secur ity measures; where personal aspects are evaluated, in par ticular analysing or predicting aspects concer ning performa nce at work, economic situation, health, personal pref erences or interests, reliability or behaviour , location or mo vements, in order to creat e or use personal prof iles; where personal data of vulnerable natural persons, in par ticular of c hildren, are processed; or where processing inv olves a larg e amount of personal data and affects a larg e number of data subjects. (76) The likelihood and sever ity of the r isk to the r ights and freedoms of the data subject should be det er mined by refe rence to the nature, scope, cont ext and pur poses of the processing. Risk should be evaluated on the basis of an objective assessment, by which it is established whether data processing operations inv olve a r isk or a high r isk. (77) Guidance on the im plementation of appropr iate measures and on the demonstration of compliance by the controller or the processor , especially as regards the identif ication of the r isk relat ed to the processing, their assessment in term s of or igin, nature, lik elihood and sever ity , and the identification of best practices to mitig ate the r isk, could be pro vided in par ticular by means of appro ved codes of conduct, appro ved cer tifications, guidelines pro vided by the Board or indications pro vided by a data protection officer . The Board ma y also issue guidelines on processing operations that are considered to be unlikely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons and indicate what measures ma y be suffi cient in such cases to address such r isk. (78) The prote ction of the r ights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data require that appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational measures be taken to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met. In order to be able to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, the controller should adopt inte r nal policies and im plement measures which meet in par ticular the pr inciples of data prot ection by design and data protection by defa ult. Such measures could consist, inter alia, of minimising the processing of personal data, pseudony mising personal data as soon as possible, transparency with regard to the functions and processing of personal data, enabling the data subject to monitor the data processing, enabling the controller to creat e and imp ro ve secur ity features. When developing, designing, selecting and using applications, ser vices and products that are based on the processing of personal data or process personal data to fulfil their task, producers of the products, ser vices and applications should be encourage d to take into account the r ight to data protection when developing and designing such products, ser vices and applications and, with due regar d to the state of the ar t, to make sure that controllers and processors are able to fulfil their data prot ection oblig ations. The pr inciples of data prote ction by design and by default should also be take n into consideration in the conte xt of public ten ders. (79) The protection of the r ights and freedoms of data subjects as well as the responsibility and liability of controllers and processors, also in relation to the monit or ing by and measures of super visor y author ities, requires a clear allocation of the responsibilities under this Regulation, including where a controller det er mines the pur poses and means of the processing jointly with other controllers or where a processing operation is car r ied out on behalf of a controller . (80) Where a controller or a processor not established in the U nion is processing personal data of data subjects who are in the U nion whose processing activities are related to the offer ing of goods or ser vices, ir respective of whether a pa yment of the data subject is required, to such data subjects in the Uni on, or to the monitori ng of their behaviour as fa r as their behaviour tak es place within the Union, the controller or the processor should designat e a representative, unless the processing is occasional, does not include processing, on a larg e scale, of special cate gor ies of personal data or the processing of personal data relating to cr iminal con victions and offe nces, and is unlikely to result in a r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, taking into account the 4.5.2016 L 119/15 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN nature, cont ext, scope and pur poses of the processing or if the controller is a public author ity or body . The rep resentative should act on behalf of the controller or the processor and ma y be addressed by an y super visor y author ity . The representative should be explicitly designat ed by a wr itten mandat e of the controller or of the processor to act on its behalf with regar d to its oblig ations under this Regulation. The designation of such a rep resentative does not affect the responsibility or liability of the controller or of the processor under this Regulation. Such a representative should perform its tasks according to the mandate received from the controller or processor , including cooperating with the compet ent super visor y author ities with regar d to any action take n to ensure compl iance with this Regulation. The designated representative should be subject to enf orcement proceedings in the event of non-com pliance by the controller or processor . (81) T o ensure compl iance with the requirements of this Regulation in respect of the processing to be car r ied out by the processor on behalf of the controller , when entr usting a processor with processing activities, the controller should use only processors pro viding suffic ient guarant ees, in par ticular in term s of exper t kno wledge, reliability and resources, to implement tec hnical and organisational measures which will meet the requirements of this Regulation, including f or the secur ity of processing. The adherence of the processor to an appro ved code of conduct or an appro ved cer tificat ion mech anism ma y be used as an element to demonstrate compliance with the oblig ations of the controller . The car r ying-out of processing by a processor should be go ver ned by a contract or other leg al act under U nion or Member Stat e la w , binding the processor to the controller , setting out the subjectmatt er and duration of the processing, the nature and pur poses of the processing, the type of personal data and catego r ies of data subjects, taking into account the specifi c task s and responsibilities of the processor in the cont ext of the processing to be car r ied out and the r isk to the r ights and freedoms of the data subject. The controller and processor ma y choose to use an individual contract or standard contractual clauses which are adopt ed either directly by the Commission or by a super visor y author ity in accordance with the consistency mech anism and then adopt ed by the Commission. Af te r the completion of the processing on behalf of the controller , the processor should, at the c hoice of the controller , retur n or delet e the personal data, unless there is a requirement to stor e the personal data under U nion or Member State law to which the processor is subject. (82) In order to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, the controller or processor should maintain records of processing activities under its responsibility . Each controller and processor should be obliged to cooperat e with the super visor y author ity and make those records, on request, available to it, so that it might ser ve f or monitoring those processing operations. (83) In order to maintain secur ity and to prevent processing in infr ing ement of this Regulation, the controller or processor should evaluate the r isks inherent in the processing and im plement measures to mitig ate those r isks , such as encr yp tion. Those measures should ensure an appropr iat e level of secur ity , including confidentiality , taking into account the state of the ar t and the costs of im plementation in relation to the r isks and the nature of the personal data to be prot ected. In assessing data secur ity r isk, consideration should be given to the r isks that are present ed by personal data processing, such as accidental or unlawful destr uction, loss, alter ation, unauthor ised disclosure of, or access to, personal data transmitt ed, stored or other wise processed which ma y in par ticular lead to ph ysical, mate r ial or non-mate r ial damage . (84) In order to enhance compliance with this Regulation where processing operations are likely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller should be responsible f or the car r ying-out of a data protection impa ct assessment to evaluate, in par ticular , the or igin, nature, par ticular ity and sever ity of that r isk. The outcome of the assessment should be tak en into account when deter mining the appropr iate measures to be taken in order to demonstrate that the processing of personal data complies with this Regulation. Where a data-protecti on im pact assessment indicates that processing operations inv olve a high r isk whic h the controller cannot mitigat e by appropr iate measures in te r ms of av ailable tec hnology and costs of implementation, a consultation of the super visor y author ity should tak e place pr ior to the processing. (85) A personal data breac h ma y , if not addressed in an appropr iat e and timely manner , result in phy sical, mater ial or non-mate r ial damage to natural persons such as loss of control o ver their personal data or limitation of their r ights, discr imination, identity thef t or fraud, fi nancial loss, unauthor ised reversal of pseudony misation, damage to reputation, loss of conf identiality of personal data prot ected by professiona l secrecy or any other significant economic or social disadvantag e to the natural person concer ned. Theref ore, as soon as the controller becomes 4.5.2016 L 119/16 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN awar e that a personal data breach has occur red, the controller should notify the personal data breac h to the super visor y author ity without undue dela y and, where feasible, not later than 72 hours af ter hav ing become awar e of it, unless the controller is able to demonstrate, in accordance with the accountability pr inciple, that the personal data breac h is unlikely to result in a r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. Where such notification cannot be achi eved within 72 hours, the reasons f or the dela y should accompan y the notification and inf or mation ma y be pro vided in phases without undue fur ther dela y . (86) The controller should communicate to the data subject a personal data breac h, without undue dela y , where that personal data breach is likely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of the natural person in order to allo w him or her to take the necessar y precautions. The communication should descr ibe the nature of the personal data breach as well as recommendations f or the natural person concer ned to mitig ate potential adverse eff ects. Such communications to data subjects should be made as soon as reasonably fe asible and in close cooperation with the super visor y author ity , respecting guidance pro vided by it or by other relevant author ities such as law-enf orcement author ities. For example, the need to mitigat e an immediat e r isk of damage w ould call f or promp t communication with data subjects whereas the need to implement appropr iate measures ag ainst continuing or similar personal data breac hes ma y justify more time f or communication. (87) It should be ascer tained whether all appropr iate tec hnological protect ion and org anisational measures hav e been im plemented to establish immediately whether a personal data breach has take n place and to inf or m prom ptly the super visor y author ity and the data subject. The fact that the notifi cation was made without undue dela y should be established taking into account in par ticular the nature and gravity of the personal data breac h and its consequences and adverse eff ects f or the data subject. Such notifi cation ma y result in an inter vention of the super visor y author ity in accordance with its tasks and po wers laid do wn in this Regulation. (88) In setting detailed r ules concer ning the f or mat and procedures applicable to the notificati on of personal data breac hes, due consideration should be given to the circumstances of that breac h, including whether or not personal data had been prot ected by appropr iat e tec hnical protection measures, effe ctively limiting the likelihood of identity fraud or other f or ms of misuse. Moreo ver , such r ules and procedures should tak e into account the legitimate interests of la w-enf orcement author ities where early disclosure could unnecessar ily ham per the investi g ation of the circumstances of a personal data breac h. (89) Directive 95/46/EC pro vided f or a g eneral oblig ation to notify the processing of personal data to the super visor y author ities. While that oblig ation produces administrative and fi nancial burdens, it did not in all cases contr ibut e to im pro ving the prot ection of personal data. Such indiscr iminate general notificati on oblig ations should theref ore be abolished, and replaced by effective procedures and mecha nisms whic h f ocus inst ead on those types of processing operations whic h are likely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons by vir tue of their nature, scope, context and pur poses. Such types of processing operations ma y be those which in, par ticular , inv olve using new tec hnologies, or are of a new kind and where no data prote ction impact assessment has been car r ied out bef ore by the controller , or where they become necessar y in the light of the time that has elapsed since the initial processing. (90) In such cases, a data protection impact assessment should be car r ied out by the controller pr ior to the processing in order to assess the par ticular like lihood and sever ity of the high r isk, taking into account the nature, scope, cont ext and pur poses of the processing and the sources of the r isk. That im pact assessment should include, in par ticular , the measures, safeguards and mec hanisms en visaged f or mitig ating that r isk, ensur ing the prote ction of personal data and demonstrating compl iance with this Regulation. (91) This should in par ticular apply to large-scale processing operations which aim to process a considerable amount of personal data at regional, national or supranational level and whic h could affect a larg e number of data subjects and which are likely to result in a high r isk, f or example, on account of their sensitivity , where in accordance with the achi eved state of tec hnological kno wledge a new tec hnology is used on a large scale as well as to other processing operations which result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, in par ticular where those operations render it more difficult f or data subjects to exer cise their r ights. A data 4.5.2016 L 119/17 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN prot ection im pact assessment should also be made where personal data are processed f or taking decisions regar ding specifi c natural persons f ollo wing any systemat ic and extensive evaluation of personal aspects relating to natural persons based on profiling those data or f ollo wing the processing of special categor ies of personal data, biometr ic data, or data on cr iminal convictions and offe nces or relat ed secur ity measures. A data prot ection im pact assessment is equally required f or monitori ng publicly accessible areas on a larg e scale, especially when using op tic-electronic devices or f or any other operations where the compet ent super visor y author ity considers that the processing is lik ely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, in par ticular because they prevent data subjects from exercising a r ight or using a ser vice or a contract, or because they are car r ied out systematically on a larg e scale. The processing of personal data should not be considered to be on a larg e scale if the processing concer ns personal data from patients or clients by an individual phy sician, other health care profess ional or la wye r . In such cases, a data protect ion impact assessment should not be mandat or y . (92) There are circumstances under which it ma y be reasonable and economical f or the subject of a data protection im pact assessment to be broader than a sing le project, f or exam ple where public author ities or bodies inte nd to establish a common application or processing platf or m or where several controllers plan to introduce a common application or processing envi ronment across an industr y sector or segment or f or a widely used hor izontal activity . (93) In the context of the adoptio n of the Member State law on which the performa nce of the tasks of the public author ity or public body is based and whic h regulate s the specific processing operation or set of operations in question, Member Stat es ma y deem it necessar y to car r y out such assessment pr ior to the processing activities. (94) Where a data prote ction impact assessment indicates that the processing w ould, in the absence of safeg uards, secur ity measures and mechanisms to mitig ate the r isk, result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons and the controller is of the opinion that the r isk cannot be mitig ated by reasonable means in term s of av ailable te chnologies and costs of im plementation, the super visor y author ity should be consult ed pr ior to the star t of processing activities. Such high r isk is lik ely to result from cer tain types of processing and the extent and frequency of processing, whic h ma y result also in a realisation of damag e or interfe rence with the r ights and freedoms of the natural person. The super visor y author ity should respond to the request f or consultation within a specified per iod. Ho wever , the absence of a reaction of the super visor y author ity within that per iod should be without prejudice to any inter vention of the super visor y author ity in accordance with its task s and po wers laid do wn in this Regulation, including the po wer to prohibit processing operations. As par t of that consultation process, the outcome of a data prote ction im pact assessment car r ied out with regar d to the processing at issue ma y be submitted to the super visor y author ity , in par ticular the measures en visaged to mitig ate the r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. (95) The processor should assist the controller , where necessar y and upon request, in ensur ing compl iance with the oblig ations der iving from the car r ying out of data prote ction imp act assessments and from pr ior consultation of the super visor y author ity . (96) A consultation of the super visor y author ity should also take place in the course of the preparation of a legislative or regulatory measure whic h pro vides f or the processing of personal data, in order to ensure compliance of the intende d processing with this Regulation and in par ticular to mitig ate the r isk inv olved f or the data subject. (97) Where the processing is car r ied out by a public author ity , excep t f or cour ts or independent judicial author ities when acting in their judicial capacity , where, in the pr ivate sect or , processing is car r ied out by a controller whose core activities consist of processing operations that require regular and syste matic monitori ng of the data subjects on a larg e scale, or where the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of processing on a large scale of special categor ies of personal data and data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences, a person with exper t kno wledge of data protect ion law and practices should assist the controller or processor to monitor internal compliance with this Regulation. In the pr ivat e sector , the core activities of a controller relat e to its pr imar y activities and do not relat e to the processing of personal data as ancillar y activities. The necessar y level of exper t kno wledge should be det er mined in par ticular according to the data processing operations car r ied out 4.5.2016 L 119/18 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN and the protection required f or the personal data processed by the controller or the processor . Such data prot ection office rs, whether or not the y are an emplo y ee of the controller , should be in a position to perform their duties and tasks in an independent manner . (98) Associations or other bodies representing catego r ies of controllers or processors should be encourag ed to dra w up codes of conduct, within the limits of this Regulation, so as to fa cilitate the effe ctive application of this Regulation, taking account of the specifi c c haracteri stics of the processing car r ied out in cer tain sector s and the specific needs of micro, small and medium ent er pr ises. In par ticular , such codes of conduct could calibrate the oblig ations of controllers and processors, taking into account the r isk likely to result from the processing f or the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. (99) When dra wing up a code of conduct, or when amending or extending such a code, associations and other bodies representing catego r ies of controllers or processors should consult relevant stakeholders, including data subjects where feasible, and hav e regar d to submissions received and views expressed in response to such consultations. (100) In order to enhance transparency and compliance with this Regulation, the establishment of cer tif ication mech anisms and data prot ection seals and marks should be encourage d, allo wing data subjects to quickl y assess the level of data protect ion of relevant products and ser vices. (101) Flo ws of personal data to and from countr ies outside the U nion and internati onal org anisations are necessar y f or the expansion of intern ational trade and internati onal cooperation. The increase in such f lo ws has raised new c hallenges and concer ns with regard to the protection of personal data. Ho wever , when personal data are transferred from the U nion to controllers, processors or other recipients in third countr ies or to inte r national org anisations, the level of protection of natural persons ensured in the U nion by this Regulation should not be under mined, including in cases of onward transfe rs of personal data from the third countr y or inte r national org anisation to controllers, processors in the same or another third countr y or intern ational org anisation. In an y event, transfer s to third countr ies and intern ational org anisations ma y only be car r ied out in full compl iance with this Regulation. A transfer could tak e place only if, subject to the other pro visions of this Regulation, the conditions laid do wn in the pro visions of this Regulation relating to the transfer of personal data to third countr ies or intern ational org anisations are compl ied with by the controller or processor . (102) This Regulation is without prejudice to internati onal agreements concluded between the U nion and third countr ies regulating the transfe r of personal data including appropr iate safeg uards f or the data subjects. Member Stat es ma y conclude intern ational agreements which inv olve the transfer of personal data to third countr ies or in ternational organisations, as far as such agreements do not affect this Regulation or an y other pro visions of U nion law and include an appropr iate level of protection f or the fundamental r ights of the data subjects. (103) The Commission ma y decide with effe ct f or the entire Union that a third countr y , a terr itory or specifi ed sector within a third countr y , or an internati onal org anisation, offers an adequat e level of data prot ection, thus pro viding leg al cer tainty and unif or mity throughout the Union as regards the third countr y or internatio nal org anisation which is considered to pro vide such level of prot ection. In such cases, transfer s of personal data to that third countr y or internati onal organisation ma y take place without the need to obtain any fur ther author is ation. The Commission ma y also decide, hav ing given notice and a full stat ement setting out the reasons to the third countr y or internati onal org anisation, to revok e such a decision. (104) In line with the fundamental values on which the Union is f ounded, in par ticular the prot ection of human r ights, the Commission should, in its assessment of the third countr y , or of a terr itory or specifi ed sector within a third countr y , take into account ho w a par ticular third countr y respects the r ule of la w , access to justice as well as in ternational human r ights nor ms and standards and its general and sect oral la w , including legislation concer ning public secur ity , def ence and national secur ity as well as public order and cr iminal la w . The adop tion of an adequacy decision with regard to a terr itory or a specif ied sect or in a third countr y should take into account clear and objective cr ite r ia, such as specifi c processing activities and the scope of applicable legal standards and legislation in f orce in the third countr y . The third countr y should offer guarantees ensur ing an adequate level of 4.5.2016 L 119/19 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN prot ection essentially equivalent to that ensured within the U nion, in par ticular where personal data are processed in one or several specific sectors. In par ticular , the third countr y should ensure effe ctive independent data protect ion super vision and should pro vide f or cooperation mec hanisms with the Member Stat es' data prot ection author ities, and the data subjects should be pro vided with effe ctive and enf orceable r ights and effective administrative and judicial redress. (105) Apar t from the internati onal commitments the third countr y or inte r national organisation has ent ered into, the Commission should take account of obligations ar ising from the third countr y's or internati onal org anisation's par ticipation in multilateral or regional systems in par ticular in relation to the prote ction of personal data, as well as the im plementation of such oblig ations. In par ticular , the third countr y's accession to the Council of Europe Convention of 28 Januar y 1981 f or the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Aut omatic Processing of P ersonal Data and its Ad ditional Protocol should be take n into account. The Commission should consult the Board when assessing the level of prot ection in third countr ies or internati onal org anisations. (106) The Commission should monitor the functioning of decisions on the level of protection in a third countr y , a terr it or y or specified sector within a third countr y , or an intern ational org anisation, and monitor the functioning of decisions adopt ed on the basis of Ar ticle 25(6) or Ar ticle 26(4) of Directive 95/46/EC. In its adequacy decisions, the Commission should pro vide f or a per iodic review mechanism of their functioning. That per iodic review should be conducted in consultation with the third countr y or intern ational org anisation in question and take into account all relevant developments in the third countr y or intern ational organisati on. For the pur poses of monitoring and of car r ying out the per iodic reviews, the Commission should take into consideration the views and fi ndings of the European P arliament and of the Council as well as of other relevant bodies and sources. The Commission should evaluate, within a reasonable time, the functioning of the latter decisions and repor t an y relevant fi ndings to the Committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ) as established under this Regulation, to the European Parliament and to the Council. (107) The Commission ma y recognise that a third countr y , a terr itory or a specif ied sector within a third countr y , or an international org anisation no long er ensures an adequate level of data prote ction. Consequently the transfer of personal data to that third countr y or intern ational org anisation should be prohibit ed, unless the requirements in this Regulation relating to transfers subject to appropr iat e safeg uards, including binding cor porate r ules, and deroga tions f or specifi c situations are fulfilled. In that case, pro vision should be made f or consultations between the Commission and such third countr ies or international org anisations. The Commission should, in a timely manner , inf or m the third countr y or int er national organisation of the reasons and ent er into consultations with it in order to remedy the situation. (108) In the absence of an adequacy decision, the controller or processor should take measures to compensat e f or the lac k of data protection in a third countr y by wa y of appropr iat e safeg uards f or the data subject. Such appropr iat e safeg uards ma y consist of making use of binding cor porat e r ules, standard data protection clauses adop ted by the Commission, standard data protection clauses adopt ed by a super visor y author ity or contractual clauses author ised by a super visor y author ity . Those safeg uards should ensure compl iance with data protection requirements and the r ights of the data subjects appropr iate to processing within the U nion, including the av ailability of enf orceable data subject r ights and of eff ective leg al remedies, including to obtain effe ctive adminis trative or judicial redress and to claim compensation, in the U nion or in a third countr y . They should relate in par ticular to compliance with the general pr inciples relating to personal data processing, the pr inciples of data prot ection by design and by default. T ransf ers ma y also be car r ied out by public author ities or bodies with public author ities or bodies in third countr ies or with internati onal organisations with cor responding duties or functions, including on the basis of pro visions to be inser ted into administrative ar range ments, such as a memorandum of understanding, pro viding f or enf orceable and effective r ights f or data subjects. Author isation by the compet ent super visor y author ity should be obtained when the safeguards are pro vided f or in administrative ar rang ements that are not leg ally binding. (109) The possibility f or the controller or processor to use standard data-protection clauses adopt ed by the Commission or by a super visor y author ity should prevent controllers or processors neither from including the 4.5.2016 L 119/20 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 Febr uar y 2011 la ying do wn the r ules and general pr inciples concer ning mec hanisms f or control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implem enting po wers (OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13). standard data-protecti on clauses in a wider contract, such as a contract between the processor and another processor , nor from adding other clauses or additional safe guards pro vided that they do not contradict, directly or indirectly , the standard contractual clauses adop ted by the Commission or by a super visor y author ity or prejudice the fundamental r ights or freedoms of the data subjects. Controllers and processors should be encourag ed to pro vide additional safeguards via contractual commitments that supplement standard protection clauses. (110) A group of under takings, or a group of ent er pr ises eng aged in a joint economic activity , should be able to make use of appro ved binding cor porate r ules f or its inte r national transfers from the Union to orga nisations within the same group of under takings, or group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity , pro vided that such cor porate r ules include all essential pr inciples and enf orceable r ights to ensure appropr iat e safeg uards f or transfer s or categor ies of transfers of personal data. (111) Pro visions should be made f or the possibility f or transfer s in cer tain circumstances where the data subject has given his or her explicit consent, where the transfe r is occasional and necessar y in relation to a contract or a legal claim, regardless of whether in a judicial procedure or whether in an administrative or any out-of-cour t procedure, including procedures bef ore regulator y bodies. Pro vision should also be made f or the possibility f or transfer s where imp or tant grounds of public inte rest laid do wn by U nion or Member Stat e la w so require or where the transfer is made from a register established by law and inte nded f or consultation by the public or persons hav ing a legitimate inter est. In the latter case, such a transfer should not inv olve the entirety of the personal data or entire cate gor ies of the data contained in the registe r and, when the register is intended f or consultation by persons having a legitimate inter est, the transfer should be made only at the request of those persons or , if they are to be the recipients, taking into full account the inter ests and fundamental r ights of the data subject. (112) Those derogations should in par ticular apply to data transfers required and necessar y f or imp or tant reasons of public inte rest, f or example in cases of inte r national data exc hange between competiti on author ities, tax or customs administrations, between financial super visor y author ities, between ser vices compet ent f or social secur ity matt ers, or f or public health, f or example in the case of contact tracing f or contagious diseases or in order to reduce and/or eliminate doping in spor t. A transfer of personal data should also be regarded as la wful where it is necessar y to protect an inte rest whic h is essential f or the data subject's or another person's vital inte rests, including phy sical inte gr ity or life, if the data subject is incapable of giving consent. In the absence of an adequacy decision, U nion or Member State la w ma y , f or im por tant reasons of public interest, expressly set limits to the transfer of specific categor ies of data to a third countr y or an international org anisation. Member Stat es should notify such pro visions to the Commission. Any transfer to an internatio nal humanitar ian org anisation of personal data of a data subject who is phy sically or leg ally incapable of giving consent, with a view to accompl ishing a task incumbent under the Geneva Conventions or to compl ying with international humanitar ian la w applicable in ar med conf licts, could be considered to be necessar y f or an impor tant reason of public inter est or because it is in the vital inte rest of the data subject. (113) T ransf ers which can be qualified as not repetitive and that only concer n a limite d number of data subjects, could also be possible f or the pur poses of the compelling legitimat e interests pursued by the controller , when those inter ests are not o ver r idden by the inter ests or r ights and freedoms of the data subject and when the controller has assessed all the circumstances sur rounding the data transfer . The controller should give par ticular considera tion to the nature of the personal data, the pur pose and duration of the proposed processing operation or operations, as well as the situation in the countr y of or igin, the third countr y and the countr y of fi nal destination, and should pro vide suitable safeg uards to prot ect fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of their personal data. Such transfer s should be possible only in residual cases where none of the other grounds f or transfer are applicable. For scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses, the legitimat e expectations of society f or an increase of kno wledge should be taken into con sideration. The controller should inf or m the super visor y author ity and the data subject about the transfer . (114) In any case, where the Commission has taken no decision on the adequate level of data prot ection in a third countr y , the controller or processor should make use of solutions that pro vide data subjects with enf orceable and eff ective r ights as regards the processing of their data in the U nion once those data hav e been transfe r red so that that the y will continue to benefit from fundamental r ights and safeguards. 4.5.2016 L 119/21 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (115) Some third countr ies adopt la ws, regulations and other legal acts which pur por t to directly regulate the processing activities of natural and leg al persons under the jur isdiction of the Member Stat es. This ma y include judgments of cour ts or tr ibunals or decisions of administrative author ities in third countr ies requir ing a controller or processor to transfer or disclose personal data, and which are not based on an inte r national agreement, such as a mutual legal assistance treaty , in f orce between the requesting third countr y and the U nion or a Member Stat e. The extrat er r itorial application of those la ws, regulations and other leg al acts ma y be in breac h of internatio nal law and ma y impede the attainment of the protect ion of natural persons ensured in the U nion by this Regulation. T ransf ers should only be allo wed where the conditions of this Regulation f or a transfer to third countr ies are met. This ma y be the case, inter alia, where disclosure is necessar y f or an impor tant ground of public interest recognised in Union or Member State la w to whic h the controller is subject. (116) When personal data mo ves across borders outside the Union it ma y put at increased r isk the ability of natural persons to exer cise data prote ction r ights in par ticular to protect themselves from the unlawful use or disclosure of that inf or mation. At the same time, super visor y author ities ma y find that the y are unable to pursue compl aints or conduct investig ations relating to the activities outside their borders. Their eff or ts to w ork tog ether in the cross-border conte xt ma y also be ham pered by insuffi cient preventative or remedial po wers, inconsistent leg al regimes, and practical obstacles like resource constraints. Theref ore, there is a need to promote closer cooperation among data prot ection super visor y author ities to help them exc hang e inf or mation and car r y out inv estigations with their intern ational counter par ts. For the pur poses of developing internati onal cooperation mech anisms to facilitat e and pro vide inte r national mutual assistance f or the enf orcement of legislation f or the prot ection of personal data, the Commission and the super visor y author ities should exc hange inf or mation and cooperat e in activities relat ed to the exe rcise of their po wers with compet ent author ities in third countr ies, based on reciprocity and in accordance with this Regulation. (117) The establishment of super visor y author ities in Member States, empo wered to perform their task s and exer cise their po wers with complet e independence, is an essential compo nent of the prote ction of natural persons with regar d to the processing of their personal data. Member Stat es should be able to establish more than one super visor y author ity , to ref lect their constitutional, organisational and administrative str ucture. (118) The independence of super visor y author ities should not mean that the super visor y author ities cannot be subject to control or monitoring mechanis ms regar ding their fi nancial expenditure or to judicial review . (119) Where a Member Stat e establishes several super visor y author ities, it should establish by la w mech anisms f or ensur ing the eff ective par ticipation of those super visor y author ities in the consiste ncy mechanism. That Member Stat e should in par ticular designat e the super visor y author ity which functions as a sing le contact point f or the eff ective par ticipation of those author ities in the mechani sm, to ensure swif t and smooth cooperation with other super visor y author ities, the Board and the Commission. (120) Each super visor y author ity should be pro vided with the financial and human resources, premises and infrastr ucture necessar y f or the eff ective performa nce of their tasks, including those relat ed to mutual assistance and cooperation with other super visor y author ities throughout the U nion. Each super visor y author ity should hav e a separate, public annual budget, whic h ma y be par t of the o verall state or national budget. (121) The ge neral conditions f or the member or members of the super visor y author ity should be laid do wn by la w in each Member Stat e and should in par ticular pro vide that those members are to be appointed, by means of a transparent procedure, either by the parliament, go ver nment or the head of State of the Member Stat e on the basis of a proposal from the go ver nment, a member of the go ver nment, the parliament or a c hamber of the parliament, or by an independent body entr uste d under Member Stat e la w . In order to ensure the independence of the super visor y author ity , the member or members should act with inte gr ity , refrain from any action that is incompati ble with their duties and should not, dur ing their term of off ice, engag e in an y incompati ble occupation, whether gainful or not. The super visor y author ity should hav e its o wn staff, c hosen by the super visor y author ity or an independent body established by Member State la w , which should be subject to the excl usive direction of the member or members of the super visor y author ity . (122) Each super visor y author ity should be compet ent on the terr itory of its o wn Member State to exe rcise the po wers and to perform the tasks conferred on it in accordance with this Regulation. This should co ver in par ticular the 4.5.2016 L 119/22 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN processing in the cont ext of the activities of an establishment of the controller or processor on the terr itory of its o wn Member State, the processing of personal data car r ied out by public author ities or pr ivate bodies acting in the public inter est, processing affectin g data subjects on its terr itory or processing car r ied out by a controller or processor not established in the Union when target ing data subjects residing on its terr itory . This should include handling compl aints lodg ed by a data subject, conducting inv estigat ions on the application of this Regulation and promoting public aware ness of the r isks , r ules, safeguards and r ights in relation to the processing of personal data. (123) The super visor y author ities should monit or the application of the pro visions pursuant to this Regulation and contr ibute to its consiste nt application throughout the U nion, in order to protect natural persons in relation to the processing of their personal data and to facilitat e the free f lo w of personal data within the internal mark et. For that pur pose, the super visor y author ities should cooperate with each other and with the Commission, without the need f or any agreement between Member State s on the pro vision of mutual assistance or on such cooperation. (124) Where the processing of personal data tak es place in the cont ext of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the U nion and the controller or processor is established in more than one Member State, or where processing taking place in the conte xt of the activities of a sing le establishment of a controller or processor in the U nion substantially aff ects or is like ly to substantially affe ct data subjects in more than one Member Stat e, the super visor y author ity f or the main establishment of the controller or processor or f or the sing le establishment of the controller or processor should act as lead author ity . It should cooperat e with the other author ities concer ned, because the controller or processor has an establishment on the terr itory of their Member State, because data subjects residing on their terr itory are substantially affe cted, or because a compl aint has been lodg ed with them. Also where a data subject not residing in that Member Stat e has lodge d a complaint, the super visor y author ity with whic h such compl aint has been lodge d should also be a super visor y author ity concer ned. Within its task s to issue guidelines on any question co ver ing the application of this Regulation, the Board should be able to issue guidelines in par ticular on the cr it er ia to be take n into account in order to ascer tain whether the processing in question substantially aff ects data subjects in more than one Member State and on what constitutes a relevant and reasoned objection. (125) The lead author ity should be compet ent to adopt binding decisions regarding measures applying the po wers conferred on it in accordance with this Regulation. In its capacity as lead author ity , the super visor y author ity should closely inv olve and coordinat e the super visor y author ities concer ned in the decision-making process. Where the decision is to reject the compl aint by the data subject in whole or in par t, that decision should be adopt ed by the super visor y author ity with whic h the compl aint has been lodg ed. (126) The decision should be agreed jointly by the lead super visor y author ity and the super visor y author ities concer ned and should be directe d to wards the main or sing le establishment of the controller or processor and be binding on the controller and processor . The controller or processor should take the necessar y measures to ensure compl iance with this Regulation and the im plementation of the decision notified by the lead super visor y author ity to the main establishment of the controller or processor as regards the processing activities in the U nion. (127) Each super visor y author ity not acting as the lead super visor y author ity should be compet ent to handle local cases where the controller or processor is established in more than one Member Stat e, but the subject matt er of the specif ic processing concer ns only processing car r ied out in a sing le Member State and inv olves only data subjects in that sing le Member Stat e, f or example, where the subject matte r concer ns the processing of emplo yees' personal data in the specific em plo yment cont ext of a Member State. In such cases, the super visor y author ity should inf or m the lead super visor y author ity without dela y about the matt er . Af ter being inf or med, the lead super visor y author ity should decide, whether it will handle the case pursuant to the pro vision on cooperation between the lead super visor y author ity and other super visor y author ities concer ned (one-stop-sh op mechanism), or whether the super visor y author ity which inf or med it should handle the case at local level. When deciding whether it will handle the case, the lead super visor y author ity should take into account whether there is an establishment of the controller or processor in the Member Stat e of the super visor y author ity which inf or med it in order to ensure effe ctive enf orcement of a decision vis--vis the controller or processor . Where the lead super visor y author ity decides to handle the case, the super visor y author ity whic h inf or med it should hav e the 4.5.2016 L 119/23 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN possibility to submit a draf t f or a decision, of whic h the lead super visor y author ity should take utmost account when prepar ing its draf t decision in that one-stop-sho p mechanis m. (128) The r ules on the lead super visor y author ity and the one-stop-sho p mech anism should not apply where the processing is car r ied out by public author ities or pr ivate bodies in the public inter est. In such cases the only super visor y author ity compet ent to exe rcise the po wers conferr ed to it in accordance with this Regulation should be the super visor y author ity of the Member Stat e where the public author ity or pr ivate body is established. (129) In order to ensure consiste nt monitori ng and enf orcement of this Regulation throughout the Union, the super visor y author ities should hav e in each Member Stat e the same tasks and eff ective po wers, including po wers of inve stigation, cor rective po wers and sanctions, and author isation and advisor y po wers, in par ticular in cases of compl aints from natural persons, and without prejudice to the po wers of prosecutor ial author ities under Member Stat e la w , to br ing infr ing ements of this Regulation to the attention of the judicial author ities and engag e in leg al proceedings. Such po wers should also include the po wer to impos e a tem porar y or definitive limitation, including a ban, on processing. Member Stat es ma y specify other tasks related to the protection of personal data under this Regulation. The po wers of super visor y author ities should be exe rcised in accordance with appropr iate procedural safeg uards set out in Union and Member State la w , im par tially , fairly and within a reasonable time. In par ticular each measure should be appropr iat e, necessar y and propor tionate in view of ensur ing compl iance with this Regulation, taking into account the circumstances of each individual case, respect the r ight of ever y person to be heard bef ore any individual measure whic h w ould affe ct him or her adversely is take n and av oid superf luous costs and exces sive incon veniences f or the persons concer ned. Investig ator y po wers as regar ds access to premises should be exercised in accordance with specif ic requirements in Member Stat e procedural law , such as the requirement to obtain a pr ior judicial author isation. Each leg ally binding measure of the super visor y author ity should be in wr iting, be clear and unambiguous, indicate the super visor y author ity whic h has issued the measure, the dat e of issue of the measure, bear the signature of the head, or a member of the super visor y author ity author ised by him or her , give the reasons f or the measure, and refe r to the r ight of an eff ective remedy . This should not preclude additional requirements pursuant to Member Stat e procedural law . The adopt ion of a legally binding decision im plies that it ma y give r ise to judicial review in the Member Stat e of the super visor y author ity that adop ted the decision. (130) Where the super visor y author ity with whic h the compl aint has been lodge d is not the lead super visor y author ity , the lead super visor y author ity should closely cooperat e with the super visor y author ity with which the compl aint has been lodg ed in accordance with the pro visions on cooperation and consist ency laid do wn in this Regulation. In such cases, the lead super visor y author ity should, when taking measures intended to produce leg al effe cts, including the im position of administrative fi nes, take utmost account of the view of the super visor y author ity with whic h the compl aint has been lodg ed and whic h should remain compe tent to car r y out an y inv estigation on the terr itory of its o wn Member Stat e in liaison with the compet ent super visor y author ity . (131) Where another super visor y author ity should act as a lead super visor y author ity f or the processing activities of the controller or processor but the concrete subject matte r of a compl aint or the possible infr ingement concer ns only processing activities of the controller or processor in the Member Stat e where the complaint has been lodg ed or the possible infr inge ment detect ed and the matte r does not substantially affe ct or is not likely to substantially aff ect data subjects in other Member State s, the super visor y author ity receiving a compl aint or det ecting or being inf or med other wise of situations that entail possible infr ing ements of this Regulation should seek an amicable settlement with the controller and, if this pro ves unsuccessful, exe rcise its full rang e of po wers. This should include: specific processing car r ied out in the terr itory of the Member State of the super visor y author ity or with regar d to data subjects on the terr itory of that Member State; processing that is car r ied out in the conte xt of an offer of goods or ser vices specifi cally aimed at data subjects in the terr itory of the Member Stat e of the super visor y author ity ; or processing that has to be assessed taking into account relevant legal oblig ations under Member State law . (132) A wareness-raising activities by super visor y author ities addressed to the public should include specifi c measures direct ed at controllers and processors, including micro, small and medium-sized enter pr ises, as well as natural persons in par ticular in the educational conte xt. 4.5.2016 L 119/24 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (133) The super visor y author ities should assist each other in performin g their tasks and pro vide mutual assistance, so as to ensure the consistent application and enf orcement of this Regulation in the intern al mark et. A super visor y author ity requesting mutual assistance ma y adopt a pro visional measure if it receives no response to a request f or mutual assistance within one month of the receipt of that request by the other super visor y author ity . (134) Each super visor y author ity should, where appropr iat e, par ticipate in joint operations with other super visor y author ities. The requeste d super visor y author ity should be oblig ed to respond to the request within a specified time per iod. (135) In order to ensure the consist ent application of this Regulation throughout the Uni on, a consistency mech anism f or cooperation between the super visor y author ities should be established. That mechani sm should in par ticular apply where a super visor y author ity intends to adopt a measure inte nded to produce leg al effects as regar ds processing operations which substantially affe ct a signif icant number of data subjects in several Member State s. It should also apply where any super visor y author ity concer ned or the Commission requests that such matte r should be handled in the consiste ncy mechanism. That mechanism should be without prejudice to any measures that the Commission ma y take in the exercise of its po wers under the T reaties. (136) In applying the consistency mechanis m, the Board should, within a det er mined per iod of time, issue an opinion, if a maj or ity of its members so decides or if so request ed by an y super visor y author ity concer ned or the Commission. The Board should also be empo wered to adopt legally binding decisions where there are disputes between super visor y author ities. For that pur pose, it should issue, in pr inciple by a two-thirds major ity of its members, leg ally binding decisions in clearly specifi ed cases where there are conf licting views among super visor y author ities, in par ticular in the cooperation mec hanism between the lead super visor y author ity and super visor y author ities concer ned on the mer its of the case, in par ticular whether there is an infr inge ment of this Regulation. (137) There ma y be an urg ent need to act in order to prot ect the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, in par ticular when the danger exists that the enf orcement of a r ight of a data subject could be considerably impeded. A super visor y author ity should theref ore be able to adopt duly justified pro visional measures on its terr itory with a specified per iod of validity which should not exceed three months. (138) The application of such mechani sm should be a condition f or the la wfulness of a measure inte nded to produce leg al effects by a super visor y author ity in those cases where its application is mandatory . In other cases of crossborder relevance, the cooperation mecha nism between the lead super visor y author ity and super visor y author ities concer ned should be applied and mutual assistance and joint operations might be car r ied out between the super visor y author ities concer ned on a bilat eral or multilateral basis without tr igge r ing the consiste ncy mech anism. (139) In order to promot e the consiste nt application of this Regulation, the Board should be set up as an independent body of the U nion. T o fulfil its objectives, the Board should hav e legal personality . The Board should be represente d by its Chair . It should replace the W orking Par ty on the Protect ion of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of P ersonal Data established by Directive 95/46/EC. It should consist of the head of a super visor y author ity of each Member State and the European Data Prote ction Super visor or their respective representatives. The Commission should par ticipate in the Board's activities without v oting r ights and the European Data Prote ction Super visor should have specifi c voting r ights. The Board should contr ibut e to the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union, including by advising the Commission, in par ticular on the level of prot ection in third countr ies or inte r national org anisations, and promoting cooperation of the super visor y author ities throughout the U nion. The Board should act independently when perf or ming its tasks. (140) The Board should be assisted by a secretar iat pro vided by the European Data Prot ection Super visor . The staff of the European Data Prote ction Super visor inv olved in car r ying out the tasks conferred on the Board by this Regulation should perform its task s exclusively under the instr uctions of, and repor t to, the Chair of the Board. (141) Ever y data subject should hav e the r ight to lodg e a complaint with a sing le super visor y author ity , in par ticular in the Member Stat e of his or her habitual residence, and the r ight to an effe ctive judicial remedy in accordance 4.5.2016 L 119/25 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN with Ar ticle 47 of the Char ter if the data subject considers that his or her r ights under this Regulation are infr inge d or where the super visor y author ity does not act on a compl aint, par tially or wholly rejects or dismisses a compl aint or does not act where such action is necessar y to prot ect the r ights of the data subject. The inv esti g ation f ollo wing a compl aint should be car r ied out, subject to judicial review , to the exte nt that is appropr iate in the specific case. The super visor y author ity should inf or m the data subject of the progress and the outcome of the compl aint within a reasonable per iod. If the case requires fur ther inve stigation or coordination with another super visor y author ity , inte r mediat e inf or mation should be given to the data subject. In order to f acilitate the submission of compl aints, each super visor y author ity should take measures such as pro viding a compl aint submission f or m which can also be complet ed electronically , without excluding other means of communication. (142) Where a data subject considers that his or her r ights under this Regulation are infr ing ed, he or she should hav e the r ight to mandate a not-f or -profi t body , org anisation or association whic h is constitute d in accordance with the la w of a Member Stat e, has statut or y objectives whic h are in the public inter est and is active in the fi eld of the protect ion of personal data to lodg e a compl aint on his or her behalf with a super visor y author ity , exer cise the r ight to a judicial remedy on behalf of data subjects or , if pro vided f or in Member State la w , exercise the r ight to receive compen sation on behalf of data subjects. A Member Stat e ma y pro vide f or such a body , org anisation or association to hav e the r ight to lodg e a compl aint in that Member Stat e, independently of a data subject's mandate , and the r ight to an eff ective judicial remedy where it has reasons to consider that the r ights of a data subject hav e been infr inge d as a result of the processing of personal data whic h infr ing es this Regulation. That body , org anisation or association ma y not be allo wed to claim compen sation on a data subject's behalf indepen dently of the data subject's mandate . (143) Any natural or legal person has the r ight to br ing an action f or annulment of decisions of the Board bef ore the Cour t of Justice under the conditions pro vided f or in Ar ticle 263 TFEU. As addressees of such decisions, the super visor y author ities concer ned whic h wish to challeng e them hav e to br ing action within two months of being notified of them, in accordance with Ar ticle 263 TFEU. Where decisions of the Board are of direct and individual concer n to a controller , processor or compl ainant, the latter ma y br ing an action f or annulment ag ainst those decisions within two months of their publication on the website of the Board, in accordance with Ar ticle 263 TFEU. Without prejudice to this r ight under Ar ticle 263 TFEU, each natural or leg al person should hav e an effective judicial remedy bef ore the compet ent national cour t ag ainst a decision of a super visor y author ity which produces legal eff ects concer ning that person. Such a decision concer ns in par ticular the exer cise of inve stigative, cor rective and author isation po wers by the super visor y author ity or the dismissal or rejection of compl aints. Ho wever , the r ight to an effective judicial remedy does not encompass measures taken by super visor y author ities whic h are not legally binding, such as opinions issued by or advice pro vided by the super visor y author ity . Proceedings ag ainst a super visor y author ity should be brought bef ore the cour ts of the Member Stat e where the super visor y author ity is established and should be conduct ed in accordance with that Member State's procedural la w . Those cour ts should exer cise full jur isdiction, which should include jur isdiction to examine all questions of fact and law relevant to the dispute bef ore them. Where a complaint has been rejected or dismissed by a super visor y author ity , the compl ainant ma y br ing proceedings bef ore the cour ts in the same Member State. In the context of judicial remedies relating to the application of this Regulation, national cour ts whic h consider a decision on the question necessar y to enable them to give judgment, ma y , or in the case pro vided f or in Ar ticle 267 TFEU, must, request the Cour t of Justice to give a preliminar y r uling on the interpr etation of U nion la w , including this Regulation. Fur ther more, where a decision of a super visor y author ity implementing a decision of the Board is c hallenged bef ore a national cour t and the validity of the decision of the Board is at issue, that national cour t does not ha ve the po wer to declare the Board's decision invalid but must refer the question of validity to the Cour t of Justice in accordance with Ar ticle 267 TFEU as inte r preted by the Cour t of Justice, where it considers the decision inv alid. Ho wever , a national cour t ma y not refe r a question on the validity of the decision of the Board at the request of a natural or leg al person which had the oppor tunity to br ing an action f or annulment of that decision, in par ticular if it was directly and individually concer ned by that decision, but had not done so within the per iod laid do wn in Ar ticle 263 TFEU. (144) Where a cour t seized of proceedings against a decision by a super visor y author ity has reason to believe that proceedings concer ning the same processing, such as the same subject matt er as regards processing by the same controller or processor , or the same cause of action, are brought bef ore a compet ent cour t in another Member State , it should contact that cour t in order to conf ir m the existence of such related proceedings. If relat ed proceedings are pending bef ore a cour t in another Member Stat e, an y cour t other than the cour t fi rst 4.5.2016 L 119/26 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN seized ma y sta y its proceedings or ma y , on request of one of the par ties, decline jur isdiction in f av our of the cour t first seized if that cour t has jur isdiction o ver the proceedings in question and its la w per mits the consoli dation of such relat ed proceedings. Proceedings are deemed to be related where they are so closely connected that it is expedient to hear and determi ne them tog ether in order to av oid the r isk of ir reconcilable judgments resulting from separate proceedings. (145) For proceedings against a controller or processor , the plaintiff should hav e the choice to br ing the action bef ore the cour ts of the Member Stat es where the controller or processor has an establishment or where the data subject resides, unless the controller is a public author ity of a Member Stat e acting in the exercise of its public po wers. (146) The controller or processor should compensat e any damage whic h a person ma y suffer as a result of processing that infr ing es this Regulation. The controller or processor should be exem pt from liability if it pro ves that it is not in any wa y responsible f or the damag e. The concept of damage should be broadly interpr ete d in the light of the case-law of the Cour t of Justice in a manner which fully ref lects the objectives of this Regulation. This is without prejudice to any claims f or damage der iving from the violation of other r ules in U nion or Member Stat e la w . Processing that infr ing es this Regulation also includes processing that infr inges delega ted and implementing acts adopt ed in accordance with this Regulation and Member Stat e law specifying r ules of this Regulation. Data subjects should receive full and effe ctive compen sation f or the damag e they have suff ered. Where controllers or processors are inv olved in the same processing, each controller or processor should be held liable f or the entire damage . Ho wever , where the y are joined to the same judicial proceedings, in accordance with Member Stat e la w , compen sation ma y be appor tioned according to the responsibility of each controller or processor f or the damage caused by the processing, pro vided that full and eff ective compen sation of the data subject who suffered the damage is ensured. Any controller or processor whic h has paid full compensation ma y subsequently institute recourse proceedings again st other controllers or processors inv olved in the same processing. (147) Where specific r ules on jur isdiction are contained in this Regulation, in par ticular as regar ds proceedings seeking a judicial remedy including compen sation, against a controller or processor , g eneral jur isdiction r ules such as those of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ) should not prejudice the application of such specific r ules. (148) In order to strengthen the enf orcement of the r ules of this Regulation, penalties including administrative fi nes should be im posed f or an y infr ingement of this Regulation, in addition to, or instea d of appropr iat e measures im posed by the super visor y author ity pursuant to this Regulation. In a case of a minor infr ing ement or if the fi ne lik ely to be imposed w ould constitut e a dispropor tionate burden to a natural person, a repr imand ma y be issued inste ad of a fine. Due regar d should ho wever be given to the nature, gravity and duration of the infr ingement, the intenti onal charact er of the infr ingement, actions taken to mitig ate the damage suff ered, degree of responsibility or any relevant previous infr ingements, the manner in which the infr ingement became kno wn to the super visor y author ity , compl iance with measures ordered against the controller or processor , adherence to a code of conduct and an y other aggra vating or mitig ating f actor . The impos ition of penalties including administrative fi nes should be subject to appropr iate procedural safeg uards in accordance with the g eneral pr inciples of U nion la w and the Char ter , including eff ective judicial protection and due process. (149) Member State s should be able to la y do wn the r ules on cr iminal penalties f or infr ing ements of this Regulation, including f or infr ingements of national r ules adop ted pursuant to and within the limits of this Regulation. Those cr iminal penalties ma y also allo w f or the depr ivation of the profits obtained through infr ing ements of this Regulation. Ho wever , the imp osition of cr iminal penalties f or infr inge ments of such national r ules and of administrative penalties should not lead to a breac h of the pr inciple of ne bis in idem, as inte r pret ed by the Cour t of Justice. (150) In order to strengthen and har monise administrative penalties f or infr ing ements of this Regulation, each super visor y author ity should hav e the po wer to im pose administrative fines. This Regulation should indicate 4.5.2016 L 119/27 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jur isdiction and the recognition and enf orcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1). infr inge ments and the upper limit and cr it er ia f or setting the related administrative fi nes, which should be det er mined by the compet ent super visor y author ity in each individual case, taking into account all relevant circumstances of the specific situation, with due regar d in par ticular to the nature, grav ity and duration of the infr inge ment and of its consequences and the measures take n to ensure compl iance with the oblig ations under this Regulation and to prevent or mitigat e the consequences of the infr ingement. Where administrative fi nes are im posed on an under taking, an under taking should be understood to be an under taking in accordance with Ar ticles 101 and 102 TFEU f or those pur poses. Where administrative fi nes are imposed on persons that are not an under taking, the super visor y author ity should take account of the g eneral level of income in the Member State as well as the economic situation of the person in consider ing the appropr iat e amount of the fi ne. The consiste ncy mechanis m ma y also be used to promote a consist ent application of administrative fi nes. It should be f or the Member Stat es to deter mine whether and to which extent public author ities should be subject to adminis trative fines. Im posing an administrative fi ne or giving a war ning does not aff ect the application of other po wers of the super visor y author ities or of other penalties under this Regulation. (151) The lega l systems of Denmark and Eston ia do not allo w f or administrative fi nes as set out in this Regulation. The r ules on administrative fine s ma y be applied in such a manner that in Denmark the fi ne is im posed by compet ent national cour ts as a cr iminal penalty and in Est onia the fine is imposed by the super visor y author ity in the framew ork of a misdemeanour procedure, pro vided that such an application of the r ules in those Member Stat es has an equivalent eff ect to administrative fi nes im posed by super visor y author ities. Theref ore the compet ent national cour ts should take into account the recommendation by the super visor y author ity initiating the fi ne. In an y event, the fi nes im posed should be eff ective, propor tionate and dissuasive. (152) Where this Regulation does not har monise administrative penalties or where necessar y in other cases, f or examp le in cases of ser ious infr ing ements of this Regulation, Member State s should implement a system whic h pro vides f or eff ective, propor tionate and dissuasive penalties. The nature of such penalties, cr iminal or adminis trative, should be det er mined by Member Stat e la w . (153) Member Stat es la w should reconcile the r ules go ver ning freedom of expression and inf or mation, including jour nalistic, academic, ar tistic and or literary expression with the r ight to the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. The processing of personal data solely f or jour nalistic pur poses, or f or the pur poses of academic, ar tistic or literary expression should be subject to derogations or exem pti ons from cer tain pro visions of this Regulation if necessar y to reconcile the r ight to the prot ection of personal data with the r ight to freedom of expression and inf or mation, as enshr ined in Ar ticle 11 of the Char ter . This should apply in par ticular to the processing of personal data in the audio visual field and in news arc hives and press librar ies. Theref ore, Member Stat es should adopt legislative measures whic h la y do wn the exem ptions and derogations necessar y f or the pur pose of balancing those fundamental r ights. Member Stat es should adopt such exem pti ons and derog ations on general pr inciples, the r ights of the data subject, the controller and the processor , the transfer of personal data to third countr ies or inte r national org anisations, the independent super visor y author ities, cooperation and consistency , and specifi c data-processing situations. Where such exem ptions or derog ations diffe r from one Member Stat e to another , the la w of the Member Stat e to which the controller is subject should apply . In order to take account of the im por tance of the r ight to freedom of expression in ever y democratic society , it is necessar y to interpret notions relating to that freedom, such as jour nalism, broadly . (154) This Regulation allo ws the pr inciple of public access to official documents to be taken into account when applying this Regulation. Public access to official documents ma y be considered to be in the public interest. P ersonal data in documents held by a public author ity or a public body should be able to be publicly disclosed by that author ity or body if the disclosure is pro vided f or by Union or Member State law to which the public author ity or public body is subject. Such la ws should reconcile public access to off icial documents and the reuse of public sector inf or mation with the r ight to the prot ection of personal data and ma y theref ore pro vide f or the necessar y reconciliation with the r ight to the prot ection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. The refe rence to public author ities and bodies should in that cont ext include all author ities or other bodies co vered by Member Stat e la w on public access to documents. Directive 2003/98/EC of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ) leaves intact and in no wa y aff ects the level of prote ction of natural persons with regard to the 4.5.2016 L 119/28 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Directive 2003/98/EC of the European P arliament and of the Council of 17 No vember 2003 on the reuse of public secto r inf or mation (OJ L 345, 31.12.2003, p. 90). processing of personal data under the pro visions of Union and Member State la w , and in par ticular does not alter the obligations and r ights set out in this Regulation. In par ticular , that Directive should not apply to documents to whic h access is excl uded or restr icte d by vir tue of the access regimes on the grounds of prote ction of personal data, and par ts of documents accessible by vir tue of those regimes which contain personal data the re-use of whic h has been pro vided f or by la w as being incompatible with the law concer ning the protection of natural persons with regar d to the processing of personal data. (155) Member State law or collective agreements, including w ork s agreements, ma y pro vide f or specifi c r ules on the processing of emplo yees' personal data in the emp lo yment context, in par ticular f or the conditions under which personal data in the emplo yment context ma y be processed on the basis of the consent of the emplo yee, the pur poses of the recr uitment, the performa nce of the contract of emplo yment, including discharg e of oblig ations laid do wn by la w or by collective agreements, management , planning and orga nisation of work, equality and diversity in the w orkplace, health and safet y at work, and f or the pur poses of the exer cise and enjo yment, on an individual or collective basis, of r ights and benefi ts related to em plo yment, and f or the pur pose of the term ination of the emp lo yment relationship. (156) The processing of personal data f or archiving pur poses in the public interest, scientifi c or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses should be subject to appropr iate safeg uards f or the r ights and freedoms of the data subject pursuant to this Regulation. Those safeguards should ensure that te chnical and organisati onal measures are in place in order to ensure, in par ticular , the pr inciple of data minimisation. The fur ther processing of personal data f or arc hiving pur poses in the public inter est, scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses is to be car r ied out when the controller has assessed the feasibility to fulf il those pur poses by processing data which do not per mit or no long er per mit the identif ication of data subjects, pro vided that appropr iate safeg uards exist (suc h as, f or instance, pseudony misation of the data). Member Stat es should pro vide f or appropr iat e safeg uards f or the processing of personal data f or arc hiving pur poses in the public inter est, scientific or histor ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses. Member Stat es should be author ised to pro vide, under specific conditions and subject to appropr iat e safeguards f or data subjects, specif ications and derog ations with regard to the inf or mation requirements and r ights to rectification, to erasure, to be f orgotten , to restr iction of processing, to data por tability , and to object when processing personal data f or archivin g pur poses in the public inte rest, scientifi c or histor ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses. The conditions and safeg uards in question ma y entail specific procedures f or data subjects to exer cise those r ights if this is appropr iate in the light of the pur poses sought by the specific processing along with tec hnical and org anisational measures aimed at minimising the processing of personal data in pursuance of the propor tionality and necessity pr inciples. The processing of personal data f or scientific pur poses should also compl y with other relevant legislation such as on clinical tr ials. (157) By coupling inf or mation from registr ies, researche rs can obtain new kno wledge of great value with regar d to widespread medical conditions such as cardio vascular disease, cancer and depression. On the basis of registr ies, research results can be enhanced, as they draw on a larger population. Within social science, research on the basis of registr ies enables researchers to obtain essential kno wledge about the long-t er m cor relation of a number of social conditions such as unem plo yment and education with other life conditions. Research results obtained through registr ies pro vide solid, high-quality kno wledge whic h can pro vide the basis f or the f or mulation and im plementation of kno wledge-based policy , im pro ve the quality of life f or a number of people and im pro ve the efficiency of social ser vices. In order to fa cilitate scientifi c researc h, personal data can be processed f or scientifi c research pur poses, subject to appropr iate conditions and safeg uards set out in U nion or Member Stat e la w . (158) Where personal data are processed f or arch iving pur poses, this Regulation should also apply to that processing, bear ing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to deceased persons. Public author ities or public or pr ivate bodies that hold records of public inter est should be ser vices whic h, pursuant to Union or Member State la w , hav e a legal obligation to acquire, preser ve, appraise, ar rang e, descr ibe, communicat e, promote, disseminate and pro vide access to records of endur ing value f or g eneral public inter est. Member Stat es should also be author ised to pro vide f or the fur ther processing of personal data f or arch iving pur poses, f or example with a view to pro viding specifi c inf or mation related to the political behaviour under f or mer totali tar ian stat e regimes, ge nocide, cr imes ag ainst humanity , in par ticular the Holocaust, or war cr imes. 4.5.2016 L 119/29 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (159) Where personal data are processed f or scientific researc h pur poses, this Regulation should also apply to that processing. For the pur poses of this Regulation, the processing of personal data f or scientifi c researc h pur poses should be inte r preted in a broad manner including f or example te chnological development and demonstration, fundamental research , applied researc h and pr ivately funded researc h. In addition, it should take into account the U nion's objective under Ar ticle 179(1) TFEU of achi eving a European Research Area. Scientific research pur poses should also include studies conduct ed in the public inte rest in the area of public health. T o meet the specificities of processing personal data f or scientific research pur poses, specifi c conditions should apply in par ticular as regar ds the publication or other wise disclosure of personal data in the conte xt of scientifi c research pur poses. If the result of scientific research in par ticular in the health cont ext gives reason f or fur ther measures in the inter est of the data subject, the ge neral r ules of this Regulation should apply in view of those measures. (160) Where personal data are processed f or histo r ical research pur poses, this Regulation should also apply to that processing. This should also include histo r ical researc h and research f or genealogical pur poses, bear ing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to deceased persons. (161) For the pur pose of consenting to the par ticipation in scientific research activities in clinical tr ials, the relevant pro visions of Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ) should apply . (162) Where personal data are processed f or statistical pur poses, this Regulation should apply to that processing. U nion or Member State law should, within the limits of this Regulation, deter mine statistical cont ent, control of access, specifications f or the processing of personal data f or statistical pur poses and appropr iate measures to safegua rd the r ights and freedoms of the data subject and f or ensur ing statistical conf identiality . Statistical pur poses mean an y operation of collection and the processing of personal data necessar y f or statistical sur ve ys or f or the production of statistical results. Those statistical results ma y fur ther be used f or diffe rent pur poses, including a scientific research pur pose. The statistical pur pose implies that the result of processing f or statistical pur poses is not personal data, but aggreg ate data, and that this result or the personal data are not used in suppor t of measures or decisions regar ding any par ticular natural person. (163) The conf idential inf or mation which the Union and national statistical author ities collect f or the production of official European and off icial national statistics should be protect ed. European statistics should be developed, produced and disseminated in accordance with the statistical pr inciples as set out in Ar ticle 338(2) TFEU, while national statistics should also comply with Member State la w . Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 2 ) pro vides fur ther specific ations on statistical conf identiality f or European statistics. (164) As regar ds the po wers of the super visor y author ities to obtain from the controller or processor access to personal data and access to their premises, Member Stat es ma y adopt by la w , within the limits of this Regulation, specific r ules in order to safeguard the profes sional or other equivalent secrecy oblig ations, in so f ar as necessar y to reconcile the r ight to the prot ection of personal data with an oblig ation of professional secrecy . This is without prejudice to existing Member Stat e obligations to adop t r ules on professional secrecy where required by Union la w . (165) This Regulation respects and does not prejudice the status under existing constitutional la w of c hurche s and religious associations or communities in the Member States, as recognised in Ar ticle 17 TFEU. (166) In order to fulf il the objectives of this Regulation, namely to protect the fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons and in par ticular their r ight to the protection of personal data and to ensure the free mo vement 4.5.2016 L 119/30 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European P arliament and of the Council of 16 Apr il 2014 on clinical tr ials on medicinal products f or human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC (OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on European statistics and repealing Regulation (EC, Euratom ) No 1101/2008 of the European P arliament and of the Council on the transmission of data subject to statistical confidentiality to the Statistical Offi ce of the European Communities, Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, and Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom establishing a Committee on the Statistical Programmes of the European Communities (OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164). of personal data within the U nion, the po wer to adop t acts in accordance with Ar ticle 290 TFEU should be delegat ed to the Commission. In par ticular , delegat ed acts should be adop ted in respect of cr it er ia and requirements f or cer tification mechanisms, inf or mation to be present ed by standardised icons and procedures f or pro viding such icons. It is of par ticular im por tance that the Commission car r y out appropr iat e consultations dur ing its preparatory w ork , including at exper t level. The Commission, when prepar ing and dra wing-up delegat ed acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropr iate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council. (167) In order to ensure unif or m conditions f or the im plementation of this Regulation, imple menting po wers should be conferr ed on the Commission when pro vided f or by this Regulation. Those po wers should be exer cised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. In that context , the Commission should consider specifi c measures f or micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises. (168) The examination procedure should be used f or the adop tion of implementing acts on standard contractual clauses between controllers and processors and between processors; codes of conduct ; tec hnical standards and mech anisms f or cer tificat ion; the adequate level of prot ection aff orded by a third countr y , a terr itory or a specified sector within that third countr y , or an intern ational organisation; standard prot ection clauses; f or mats and procedures f or the exc hange of inf or mation by electronic means between controllers, processors and super visor y author ities f or binding cor porate r ules; mutual assistance; and ar rangements f or the exc hange of inf or mation by electronic means between super visor y author ities, and between super visor y author ities and the Board. (169) The Commission should adop t immediate ly applicable im plementing acts where available evidence reveals that a third countr y , a terr itory or a specifi ed sect or within that third countr y , or an intern ational org anisation does not ensure an adequate level of protection, and imp erative grounds of urg ency so require. (170) Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to ensure an equivalent level of prote ction of natural persons and the free f lo w of personal data throughout the Union, cannot be suffi ciently achieved by the Member Stat es and can rather , by reason of the scale or effects of the action, be bett er achieved at U nion level, the Uni on ma y adopt measures, in accordance with the pr inciple of subsidiar ity as set out in Ar ticle 5 of the T reaty on European Uni on (TEU). In accordance with the pr inciple of propor tionality as set out in that Ar ticle, this Regulation does not go bey ond what is necessar y in order to achi eve that objective. (171) Directive 95/46/EC should be repealed by this Regulation. Processing already under wa y on the date of application of this Regulation should be brought into conf or mity with this Regulation within the per iod of two y ears af ter which this Regulation ent ers into f orce. Where processing is based on consent pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC, it is not necessar y f or the data subject to give his or her consent ag ain if the manner in whic h the consent has been given is in line with the conditions of this Regulation, so as to allo w the controller to continue such processing af ter the date of application of this Regulation. Commission decisions adop ted and author isations by super visor y author ities based on Directive 95/46/EC remain in f orce until amended, replaced or repealed. (172) The European Data Protection Super visor was consulted in accordance with Ar ticle 28(2) of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and delivered an opinion on 7 Marc h 2012 ( 1 ). (173) This Regulation should apply to all matters concer ning the prote ction of fundamental r ights and freedoms vis-vis the processing of personal data whic h are not subject to specific oblig ations with the same objective set out in Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ), including the obligations on the controller and the r ights of natural persons. In order to clar ify the relationship between this Regulation and Directive 2002/58/EC, that Directive should be amended according ly . Once this Regulation is adopt ed, Directive 2002/58/EC should be reviewed in par ticular in order to ensure consiste ncy with this Regulation, 4.5.2016 L 119/31 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) OJ C 192, 30.6.2012, p. 7. ( 2 ) Directive 2002/58/EC of the European P arliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concer ning the processing of personal data and the protection of pr ivacy in the electronic communications secto r (Directive on pr ivacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37). HA VE ADOPTED THIS REGUL A TION: CHAPTER I Gener al provisions Ar ticle 1 Subject-matter and objectiv es 1. This Regulation la ys do wn r ules relating to the prote ction of natural persons with rega rd to the processing of personal data and r ules relating to the free mo vement of personal data. 2. This Regulation prote cts fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons and in par ticular their r ight to the prote ction of personal data. 3. The free mo vement of personal data within the Union shall be neither restr icte d nor prohibit ed f or reasons connected with the prote ction of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data. Ar ticle 2 Mater ial scope 1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data wholly or par tly by automat ed means and to the processing other than by automat ed means of personal data whic h f or m par t of a filing system or are intended to f or m par t of a f iling system. 2. This Regulation does not apply to the processing of personal data: (a) in the course of an activity whic h f alls outside the scope of Union la w ; (b) by the Member State s when car r ying out activities whic h f all within the scope of Chapt er 2 of Title V of the TEU; (c) by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity ; (d) by compet ent author ities f or the pur poses of the prevention, inve stigation, det ection or prosecution of cr iminal offences or the execut ion of cr iminal penalties, including the safeg uarding against and the prevention of threats to public secur ity . 3. For the processing of personal data by the U nion institutions, bodies, offices and ag encies, Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 applies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other U nion leg al acts applicable to such processing of personal data shall be adap ted to the pr inciples and r ules of this Regulation in accordance with Ar ticle 98. 4. This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC, in par ticular of the liability r ules of interm ediar y ser vice pro viders in Ar ticles 12 to 15 of that Directive. Ar ticle 3 T er r itor ial scope 1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in the conte xt of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the U nion, regardl ess of whether the processing tak es place in the Uni on or not. 4.5.2016 L 119/32 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subjects who are in the Union by a controller or processor not established in the U nion, where the processing activities are related to: (a) the offer ing of goods or ser vices, ir respective of whether a pa yment of the data subject is required, to such data subjects in the Union; or (b) the monitori ng of their behaviour as f ar as their behaviour takes place within the U nion. 3. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by a controller not established in the U nion, but in a place where Member Stat e la w applies by vir tue of public intern ational law . Ar ticle 4 Def initions For the pur poses of this Regulation: (1) personal data means any inf or mation relating to an identified or identif iable natural person (data subject ); an identifiable natural person is one who can be identif ied, directly or indirectly , in par ticular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an identification number , location data, an online identif ier or to one or more f actors specific to the phy sical, physiological, ge netic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person; (2) processing means an y operation or set of operations which is performe d on personal data or on sets of personal data, whether or not by automat ed means, such as collection, recording, org anisation, str uctur ing, storag e, adap tation or alte ration, retr ieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or other wise making av ailable, alignment or combination, restr iction, erasure or destr uction; (3) restr iction of processing means the marking of stored personal data with the aim of limiting their processing in the future; (4) profiling means an y f or m of automat ed processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate cer tain personal aspects relating to a natural person, in par ticular to analyse or predict aspects concer ning that natural person's perf or mance at w ork, economic situation, health, personal pref erences, inte rests, reliability , beha viour , location or mo vements; (5) pseudon ymisation means the processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be attr ibut ed to a specif ic data subject without the use of additional inf or mation, pro vided that such additional inf or mation is kep t separately and is subject to tec hnical and org anisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not attr ibut ed to an identif ied or identifiable natural person; (6) filing system means any str uctured set of personal data which are accessible according to specif ic cr it er ia, whether centralised, decentralised or dispersed on a functional or ge ographical basis; (7) controller means the natural or leg al person, public author ity , ag ency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, det er mines the pur poses and means of the processing of personal data; where the pur poses and means of such processing are det er mined by U nion or Member Stat e la w , the controller or the specific cr ite r ia f or its nomination ma y be pro vided f or by Union or Member State la w ; (8) processor means a natural or lega l person, public author ity , ag ency or other body whic h processes personal data on behalf of the controller; (9) recipient means a natural or legal person, public author ity , age ncy or another body , to whic h the personal data are disclosed, whether a third par ty or not. Ho wever , public author ities which ma y receive personal data in the 4.5.2016 L 119/33 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN framew ork of a par ticular inquir y in accordance with U nion or Member State la w shall not be regarded as recipients; the processing of those data by those public author ities shall be in compliance with the applicable data prot ection r ules according to the pur poses of the processing; (10) third par ty means a natural or legal person, public author ity , ag ency or body other than the data subject, controller , processor and persons who, under the direct author ity of the controller or processor , are author ised to process personal data; (11) consent of the data subject means any freely given, specifi c, inf or med and unambiguous indication of the data subject's wishes by whic h he or she, by a statement or by a clear affi r mative action, signif ies agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her; (12) personal data breac h means a breac h of secur ity leading to the accidental or unlawful destr uction, loss, altera tion, unauthor ised disclosure of, or access to, personal data transmitted, store d or other wise processed; (13) gen etic data means personal data relating to the inher it ed or acquired ge netic c haracteri stics of a natural person whic h give unique inf or mation about the ph ysiology or the health of that natural person and which result, in par ticular , from an analysis of a biological samp le from the natural person in question; (14) biometr ic data means personal data resulting from specific tec hnical processing relating to the phy sical, phy sio logical or behavi oural c haracter istics of a natural person, which allo w or confir m the unique identif ication of that natural person, such as f acial images or dactyloscopic data; (15) data concer ning health means personal data related to the phy sical or mental health of a natural person, including the pro vision of health care ser vices, which reveal inf or mation about his or her health status; (16) main establishment means: (a) as regards a controller with establishments in more than one Member Stat e, the place of its central adminis tration in the Union, unless the decisions on the pur poses and means of the processing of personal data are take n in another establishment of the controller in the U nion and the latter establishment has the po wer to hav e such decisions im plemented, in whic h case the establishment hav ing tak en such decisions is to be considered to be the main establishment ; (b) as regar ds a processor with establishments in more than one Member Stat e, the place of its central adminis tration in the U nion, or , if the processor has no central administration in the Union, the establishment of the processor in the U nion where the main processing activities in the context of the activities of an establishment of the processor take place to the extent that the processor is subject to specific oblig ations under this Regulation; (17) representative means a natural or lega l person established in the Uni on who, designate d by the controller or processor in wr iting pursuant to Ar ticle 27, represents the controller or processor with regar d to their respective oblig ations under this Regulation; (18) ent er pr ise means a natural or legal person enga ged in an economic activity , ir respective of its legal f or m, including par tnerships or associations regularly enga ged in an economic activity ; (19) group of under takings means a controlling under taking and its controlled under takings; (20) binding cor porat e r ules means personal data protection policies which are adhered to by a controller or processor established on the terr itory of a Member Stat e f or transfers or a set of transfers of personal data to a controller or processor in one or more third countr ies within a group of under takings, or group of enterpr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity ; (21) super visor y author ity means an independent public author ity which is established by a Member State pursuant to Ar ticle 51; 4.5.2016 L 119/34 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (22) super visor y author ity concer ned means a super visor y author ity which is concer ned by the processing of personal data because: (a) the controller or processor is established on the terr it or y of the Member Stat e of that super visor y author ity ; (b) data subjects residing in the Member Stat e of that super visor y author ity are substantially aff ected or lik ely to be substantially affect ed by the processing; or (c) a compl aint has been lodge d with that super visor y author ity ; (23) cross-border processing means either: (a) processing of personal data which takes place in the conte xt of the activities of establishments in more than one Member State of a controller or processor in the Union where the controller or processor is established in more than one Member State ; or (b) processing of personal data whic h tak es place in the cont ext of the activities of a sing le establishment of a controller or processor in the U nion but which substantially aff ects or is likely to substantially affe ct data subjects in more than one Member State . (24) relevant and reasoned objection means an objection to a draf t decision as to whether there is an infr ing ement of this Regulation, or whether en visaged action in relation to the controller or processor compl ies with this Regulation, whic h clearly demonstrat es the signif icance of the r isks posed by the draf t decision as regards the fundamental r ights and freedoms of data subjects and, where applicable, the free f lo w of personal data within the U nion; (25) inf or mation society ser vice means a ser vice as defined in point (b) of Ar ticle 1(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ); (26) int er national org anisation means an orga nisation and its subordinate bodies go ver ned by public internati onal la w , or any other body whic h is set up by , or on the basis of, an agreement between two or more countr ies. CH APTER II Pr inciples Ar ticle 5 Pr inciples relating to processing of personal dat a 1. P ersonal data shall be: (a) processed lawfully , fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject (lawfulness, fa ir ness and transparency); (b) collect ed f or specified, explicit and legitimate pur poses and not fur ther processed in a manner that is incompati ble with those pur poses; fur ther processing f or archiving pur poses in the public inte rest, scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses shall, in accordance with Ar ticle 89(1), not be considered to be incompat ible with the initial pur poses (pur pose limitation); (c) adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessar y in relation to the pur poses f or which they are processed (data minimisation); (d) accurate and, where necessar y , kep t up to date ; ever y reasonable step must be take n to ensure that personal data that are inaccurat e, hav ing regar d to the pur poses f or whic h the y are processed, are erased or rectifi ed without dela y (accuracy); 4.5.2016 L 119/35 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 Sep tember 2015 la ying do wn a procedure f or the pro vision of inf or mation in the f ield of t echnical regulations and of r ules on Inf or mation Society ser vices (OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1). (e) kep t in a f or m which per mits identif ication of data subjects f or no long er than is necessar y f or the pur poses f or which the personal data are processed; personal data ma y be st ored f or longer per iods insof ar as the personal data will be processed solely f or arc hiving pur poses in the public interest, scientific or histor ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses in accordance with Ar ticle 89(1) subject to implementation of the appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational measures required by this Regulation in order to safeguard the r ights and freedoms of the data subject (stor age limitation); (f) processed in a manner that ensures appropr iat e secur ity of the personal data, including prot ection aga inst unauthor ised or unlawful processing and ag ainst accidental loss, destr uction or damage , using appropr iat e tec hnical or org anisational measures (integri ty and confidentiality). 2. The controller shall be responsible f or , and be able to demonstrate compliance with, paragraph 1 (accountability). Ar ticle 6 Lawfulness of processing 1. Processing shall be la wful only if and to the extent that at least one of the f ollo wing applies: (a) the data subject has given consent to the processing of his or her personal data f or one or more specific pur poses; (b) processing is necessar y f or the perf or mance of a contract to which the data subject is par ty or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject pr ior to ent er ing into a contract ; (c) processing is necessar y f or compliance with a leg al oblig ation to which the controller is subject ; (d) processing is necessar y in order to prot ect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person; (e) processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exer cise of official author ity vested in the controller ; (f) processing is necessar y f or the pur poses of the legitimate inter ests pursued by the controller or by a third par ty , excep t where such inter ests are o ver r idden by the interests or fundamental r ights and freedoms of the data subject which require prot ection of personal data, in par ticular where the data subject is a c hild. P oint (f) of the fi rst subparagraph shall not apply to processing car r ied out by public author ities in the performa nce of their task s. 2. Member Stat es ma y maintain or introduce more specifi c pro visions to adap t the application of the r ules of this Regulation with regar d to processing f or compl iance with points (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 by det er mining more precisely specific requirements f or the processing and other measures to ensure la wful and fair processing including f or other specific processing situations as pro vided f or in Chapt er IX. 3. The basis f or the processing refe r red to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid do wn by: (a) Uni on la w ; or (b) Member Stat e la w to which the controller is subject. The pur pose of the processing shall be det er mined in that lega l basis or , as rega rds the processing refe r red to in point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inte rest or in the exercise of official author ity vested in the controller . That legal basis ma y contain specifi c pro visions to adap t the application of r ules of this Regulation, inter alia: the ge neral conditions go ver ning the la wfulness of processing by the controller; the types of data whic h are subject to the processing; the data subjects concer ned; the entities to, and the pur poses f or whic h, the personal data ma y be disclosed; the pur pose limitation; storag e per iods; and processing operations and processing procedures, including measures to ensure la wful and f air processing such as those f or other specifi c 4.5.2016 L 119/36 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN processing situations as pro vided f or in Chapt er IX. The Uni on or the Member State law shall meet an objective of public interest and be propor tionate to the legitimate aim pursued. 4. Where the processing f or a pur pose other than that f or whic h the personal data hav e been collect ed is not based on the data subject's consent or on a Union or Member Stat e la w whic h constitut es a necessar y and propor tionate measure in a democratic society to safeg uard the objectives refe r red to in Ar ticle 23(1), the controller shall, in order to ascer tain whether processing f or another pur pose is compatib le with the pur pose f or which the personal data are initially collected, tak e into account, inte r alia: (a) any link between the pur poses f or which the personal data hav e been collect ed and the pur poses of the inte nded fur ther processing; (b) the conte xt in whic h the personal data hav e been collect ed, in par ticular regar ding the relationship between data subjects and the controller ; (c) the nature of the personal data, in par ticular whether special catego r ies of personal data are processed, pursuant to Ar ticle 9, or whether personal data related to cr iminal convictions and off ences are processed, pursuant to Ar ticle 10; (d) the possible consequences of the intended fur ther processing f or data subjects; (e) the existence of appropr iate safeg uards, which ma y include encr ypt ion or pseudonymisation. Ar ticle 7 Conditions f or consent 1. Where processing is based on consent, the controller shall be able to demonstrate that the data subject has consente d to processing of his or her personal data. 2. If the data subject's consent is given in the conte xt of a wr itten declaration which also concer ns other matt ers, the request f or consent shall be present ed in a manner which is clearly distinguishable from the other matt ers, in an intelli gible and easily accessible f or m, using clear and plain language . Any par t of such a declaration whic h constitutes an infr ingement of this Regulation shall not be binding. 3. The data subject shall hav e the r ight to withdraw his or her consent at an y time. The withdrawal of consent shall not affe ct the la wfulness of processing based on consent bef ore its withdra wal. Pr ior to giving consent, the data subject shall be inf or med thereof. It shall be as easy to withdra w as to give consent. 4. When assessing whether consent is freely given, utmost account shall be take n of whether , inter alia, the performa nce of a contract, including the pro vision of a ser vice, is conditional on consent to the processing of personal data that is not necessar y f or the performance of that contract. Ar ticle 8 Conditions applicable to child's consent in relation to informa tion society ser vices 1. Where point (a) of Ar ticle 6(1) applies, in relation to the offe r of inf or mation society ser vices directly to a c hild, the processing of the personal data of a c hild shall be lawful where the c hild is at least 16 ye ars old. Where the c hild is belo w the age of 16 years, such processing shall be la wful only if and to the extent that consent is given or author ised by the holder of parental responsibility o ver the child. Member States ma y pro vide by la w f or a lo wer ag e f or those pur poses pro vided that such lo wer age is not belo w 13 y ears. 4.5.2016 L 119/37 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. The controller shall make reasonable eff or ts to ver ify in such cases that consent is given or author ised by the holder of parental responsibility o ver the c hild, taking into consideration av ailable tec hnology . 3. P aragraph 1 shall not affe ct the g eneral contract law of Member Stat es such as the r ules on the validity , f or mation or effect of a contract in relation to a c hild. Ar ticle 9 Processing of special categor ies of personal dat a 1. Processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic or igin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, and the processing of genetic data, biometr ic data f or the pur pose of uniquely identifying a natural person, data concer ning health or data concer ning a natural person's sex life or sexual or ientation shall be prohibit ed. 2. P aragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the f ollo wing applies: (a) the data subject has given explicit consent to the processing of those personal data f or one or more specifi ed pur poses, excep t where Union or Member State law pro vide that the prohibition refe r red to in paragraph 1 ma y not be lif ted by the data subject ; (b) processing is necessar y f or the pur poses of car r ying out the oblig ations and exercising specific r ights of the controller or of the data subject in the field of em plo yment and social secur ity and social protection la w in so far as it is author ised by Union or Member Stat e la w or a collective agreement pursuant to Member Stat e law pro viding f or appropr iate safeguards f or the fundamental r ights and the interests of the data subject ; (c) processing is necessar y to protect the vital inte rests of the data subject or of another natural person where the data subject is ph ysically or leg ally incapable of giving consent ; (d) processing is car r ied out in the course of its legitimate activities with appropr iate safeguards by a f oundation, association or any other not-f or -profit body with a political, philosophical, religious or trade union aim and on condition that the processing relates solely to the members or to f or mer members of the body or to persons who hav e regular contact with it in connection with its pur poses and that the personal data are not disclosed outside that body without the consent of the data subjects; (e) processing relates to personal data whic h are manifest ly made public by the data subject ; (f) processing is necessar y f or the establishment, exe rcise or defence of legal claims or whenever cour ts are acting in their judicial capacity ; (g) processing is necessar y f or reasons of substantial public inter est, on the basis of Union or Member Stat e la w which shall be propor tionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the r ight to data prote ction and pro vide f or suitable and specifi c measures to safeg uard the fundamental r ights and the interests of the data subject ; (h) processing is necessar y f or the pur poses of preventive or occupational medicine, f or the assessment of the w orking capacity of the emplo y ee, medical diagnosis, the pro vision of health or social care or treatment or the manag ement of health or social care system s and ser vices on the basis of Union or Member State la w or pursuant to contract with a health professional and subject to the conditions and safegua rds refer red to in paragraph 3; (i) processing is necessar y f or reasons of public interest in the area of public health, such as prot ecting ag ainst ser ious cross-border threats to health or ensur ing high standards of quality and safety of health care and of medicinal products or medical devices, on the basis of Union or Member State la w which pro vides f or suitable and specif ic measures to safegua rd the r ights and freedoms of the data subject, in par ticular professional secrecy ; 4.5.2016 L 119/38 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (j) processing is necessar y f or archiving pur poses in the public inte rest, scientific or histo r ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses in accordance with Ar ticle 89(1) based on Union or Member State la w which shall be propor tionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the r ight to data protection and pro vide f or suitable and specifi c measures to safegua rd the fundamental r ights and the inte rests of the data subject. 3. P ersonal data refer red to in paragraph 1 ma y be processed f or the pur poses refer red to in point (h) of paragraph 2 when those data are processed by or under the responsibility of a profess ional subject to the oblig ation of professional secrecy under U nion or Member Stat e law or r ules established by national compet ent bodies or by another person also subject to an obligation of secrecy under U nion or Member Stat e la w or r ules established by national compet ent bodies. 4. Member Stat es ma y maintain or introduce fur ther conditions, including limitations, with regard to the processing of ge netic data, biometr ic data or data concer ning health. Ar ticle 10 Processing of personal data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences Processing of personal data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences or relat ed secur ity measures based on Ar ticle 6(1) shall be car r ied out only under the control of off icial author ity or when the processing is author ised by U nion or Member State law pro viding f or appropr iat e safeg uards f or the r ights and freedoms of data subjects. Any compre hensive registe r of cr iminal convictions shall be kep t only under the control of off icial author ity . Ar ticle 11 Processing which does not require identif ication 1. If the pur poses f or which a controller processes personal data do not or do no longer require the identif ication of a data subject by the controller , the controller shall not be obliged to maintain, acquire or process additional inf or mation in order to identify the data subject f or the sole pur pose of compl ying with this Regulation. 2. Where, in cases refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle, the controller is able to demonstrate that it is not in a position to identify the data subject, the controller shall inf or m the data subject according ly , if possible. In such cases, Ar ticles 15 to 20 shall not apply excep t where the data subject, f or the pur pose of exer cising his or her r ights under those ar ticles, pro vides additional inf or mation enabling his or her identification. CH APTER III Rights of the data subject Section 1 T ransparency and modalities Ar ticle 12 T ransparent inf or mation, communication and modalities fo r the ex ercise of the r ights of the dat a subject 1. The controller shall tak e appropr iate measures to pro vide any inf or mation refer red to in Ar ticles 13 and 14 and an y communication under Ar ticles 15 to 22 and 34 relating to processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelli gible and easily accessible f or m, using clear and plain language , in par ticular f or an y inf or mation addressed specific ally to a child. The inf or mation shall be pro vided in wr iting, or by other means, including, where appropr iat e, by electronic means. When request ed by the data subject, the inf or mation ma y be pro vided orally , pro vided that the identity of the data subject is pro ven by other means. 4.5.2016 L 119/39 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. The controller shall facilitat e the exer cise of data subject r ights under Ar ticles 15 to 22. In the cases refer red to in Ar ticle 11(2), the controller shall not refuse to act on the request of the data subject f or exer cising his or her r ights under Ar ticles 15 to 22, unless the controller demonstrates that it is not in a position to identify the data subject. 3. The controller shall pro vide inf or mation on action taken on a request under Ar ticles 15 to 22 to the data subject without undue dela y and in any event within one month of receip t of the request. That per iod ma y be extended by two fur ther months where necessar y , taking into account the complexity and number of the requests. The controller shall inf or m the data subject of any such extensi on within one month of receipt of the request, tog ether with the reasons f or the dela y . Where the data subject makes the request by electronic f or m means, the inf or mation shall be pro vided by electronic means where possible, unless other wise requested by the data subject. 4. If the controller does not take action on the request of the data subject, the controller shall inf or m the data subject without dela y and at the late st within one month of receipt of the request of the reasons f or not taking action and on the possibility of lodging a compl aint with a super visor y author ity and seeking a judicial remedy . 5. Inf or mation pro vided under Ar ticles 13 and 14 and any communication and an y actions take n under Ar ticles 15 to 22 and 34 shall be pro vided free of charg e. Where requests from a data subject are manifestly unf ounded or excess ive, in par ticular because of their repetitive c haracter , the controller ma y either: (a) c harge a reasonable f ee taking into account the administrative costs of pro viding the inf or mation or communication or taking the action requeste d; or (b) refuse to act on the request. The controller shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifestly unf ounded or excessiv e c haracter of the request. 6. Without prejudice to Ar ticle 11, where the controller has reasonable doubts concer ning the identity of the natural person making the request ref er red to in Ar ticles 15 to 21, the controller ma y request the pro vision of additional inf or mation necessar y to confir m the identity of the data subject. 7. The inf or mation to be pro vided to data subjects pursuant to Ar ticles 13 and 14 ma y be pro vided in combination with standardised icons in order to give in an easily visible, inte lligible and clearly legible manner a meaningful o ver view of the inte nded processing. Where the icons are presented electronically the y shall be machine-readable. 8. The Commission shall be empo wered to adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Ar ticle 92 f or the pur pose of det er mining the inf or mation to be present ed by the icons and the procedures f or pro viding standardised icons. Section 2 Infor mation and access to personal data Ar ticle 13 Informa tion t o be pro vided where personal dat a are collected from the dat a subject 1. Where personal data relating to a data subject are collect ed from the data subject, the controller shall, at the time when personal data are obtained, pro vide the data subject with all of the f ollo wing inf or mation: (a) the identity and the contact details of the controller and, where applicable, of the controller's representative; (b) the contact details of the data protection officer , where applicable; (c) the pur poses of the processing f or which the personal data are intende d as well as the leg al basis f or the processing; 4.5.2016 L 119/40 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (d) where the processing is based on point (f) of Ar ticle 6(1), the legitimate inter ests pursued by the controller or by a third par ty ; (e) the recipients or cate gor ies of recipients of the personal data, if an y ; (f) where applicable, the fact that the controller inte nds to transfer personal data to a third countr y or int er national org anisation and the existen ce or absence of an adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfe rs refer red to in Ar ticle 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of Ar ticle 49(1), reference to the appropr iat e or suitable safeg uards and the means by whic h to obtain a cop y of them or where they hav e been made available. 2. In addition to the inf or mation refer red to in paragraph 1, the controller shall, at the time when personal data are obtained, pro vide the data subject with the f ollo wing fur ther inf or mation necessar y to ensure f air and transparent processing: (a) the per iod f or whic h the personal data will be st ored, or if that is not possible, the cr it er ia used to det er mine that per iod; (b) the existen ce of the r ight to request from the controller access to and rectifi cation or erasure of personal data or restr iction of processing concer ning the data subject or to object to processing as well as the r ight to data por tability ; (c) where the processing is based on point (a) of Ar ticle 6(1) or point (a) of Ar ticle 9(2), the existence of the r ight to withdraw consent at any time, without affect ing the la wfulness of processing based on consent bef ore its withdrawal; (d) the r ight to lodg e a complaint with a super visor y author ity ; (e) whether the pro vision of personal data is a statut or y or contractual requirement, or a requirement necessar y to ent er into a contract, as well as whether the data subject is oblig ed to pro vide the personal data and of the possible consequences of f ailure to pro vide such data; (f) the existen ce of automat ed decision-making, including prof iling, refer red to in Ar ticle 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful inf or mation about the logic inv olved, as well as the signif icance and the en visaged consequences of such processing f or the data subject. 3. Where the controller intends to fur ther process the personal data f or a pur pose other than that f or which the personal data were collect ed, the controller shall pro vide the data subject pr ior to that fur ther processing with inf or mation on that other pur pose and with any relevant fur ther inf or mation as ref er red to in paragraph 2. 4. P aragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply where and insofar as the data subject already has the inf or mation. Ar ticle 14 Inf or mation to be pro vided where personal dat a hav e not been obt ained from the dat a subject 1. Where personal data hav e not been obtained from the data subject, the controller shall pro vide the data subject with the f ollo wing inf or mation: (a) the identity and the contact details of the controller and, where applicable, of the controller's representative; (b) the contact details of the data protection officer , where applicable; (c) the pur poses of the processing f or which the personal data are intende d as well as the leg al basis f or the processing; (d) the categor ies of personal data concer ned; (e) the recipients or cate gor ies of recipients of the personal data, if an y ; 4.5.2016 L 119/41 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (f) where applicable, that the controller intends to transfer personal data to a recipient in a third countr y or intern at ional org anisation and the existence or absence of an adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfer s refer red to in Ar ticle 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of Ar ticle 49(1), ref erence to the appropr iat e or suitable safeg uards and the means to obtain a cop y of them or where they hav e been made available. 2. In addition to the inf or mation refer red to in paragraph 1, the controller shall pro vide the data subject with the f ollo wing inf or mation necessar y to ensure f air and transparent processing in respect of the data subject : (a) the per iod f or whic h the personal data will be st ored, or if that is not possible, the cr it er ia used to det er mine that per iod; (b) where the processing is based on point (f) of Ar ticle 6(1), the legitimate inter ests pursued by the controller or by a third par ty ; (c) the existen ce of the r ight to request from the controller access to and rectifi cation or erasure of personal data or restr iction of processing concer ning the data subject and to object to processing as well as the r ight to data por tability ; (d) where processing is based on point (a) of Ar ticle 6(1) or point (a) of Ar ticle 9(2), the existen ce of the r ight to withdraw consent at any time, without affect ing the la wfulness of processing based on consent bef ore its withdrawal; (e) the r ight to lodg e a complaint with a super visor y author ity ; (f) from whic h source the personal data or iginate, and if applicable, whether it came from publicly accessible sources; (g) the existen ce of automat ed decision-making, including prof iling, refer red to in Ar ticle 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful inf or mation about the logic inv olved, as well as the signif icance and the en visaged consequences of such processing f or the data subject. 3. The controller shall pro vide the inf or mation refer red to in paragraphs 1 and 2: (a) within a reasonable per iod af ter obtaining the personal data, but at the lates t within one month, hav ing regar d to the specifi c circumstances in which the personal data are processed; (b) if the personal data are to be used f or communication with the data subject, at the latest at the time of the fi rst communication to that data subject ; or (c) if a disclosure to another recipient is en visaged, at the lates t when the personal data are f irst disclosed. 4. Where the controller intends to fur ther process the personal data f or a pur pose other than that f or which the personal data were obtained, the controller shall pro vide the data subject pr ior to that fur ther processing with inf or mation on that other pur pose and with any relevant fur ther inf or mation as ref er red to in paragraph 2. 5. P aragraphs 1 to 4 shall not apply where and insof ar as: (a) the data subject already has the inf or mation; (b) the pro vision of such inf or mation pro ves impos sible or would inv olve a dispropor tionate eff or t, in par ticular f or processing f or archiving pur poses in the public interest, scientific or histor ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses, subject to the conditions and safeg uards refe r red to in Ar ticle 89(1) or in so f ar as the oblig ation refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle is like ly to render impossible or ser iously imp air the achi evement of the objectives of that processing. In such cases the controller shall take appropr iat e measures to protect the data subject's r ights and freedoms and legitimate interests, including making the inf or mation publicly available; (c) obtaining or disclosure is expressly laid do wn by U nion or Member State la w to which the controller is subject and which pro vides appropr iat e measures to prote ct the data subject's legitimate interests; or (d) where the personal data must remain conf idential subject to an oblig ation of professiona l secrecy regulate d by U nion or Member State la w , including a statut or y obligation of secrecy . 4.5.2016 L 119/42 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 15 Right of access b y the dat a subject 1. The data subject shall hav e the r ight to obtain from the controller confir mation as to whether or not personal data concer ning him or her are being processed, and, where that is the case, access to the personal data and the f ollo wing inf or mation: (a) the pur poses of the processing; (b) the catego r ies of personal data concer ned; (c) the recipients or catego r ies of recipient to whom the personal data have been or will be disclosed, in par ticular recipients in third countr ies or internati onal org anisations; (d) where possible, the envisag ed per iod f or whic h the personal data will be stor ed, or , if not possible, the cr ite r ia used to det er mine that per iod; (e) the existe nce of the r ight to request from the controller rectifi cation or erasure of personal data or restr iction of processing of personal data concer ning the data subject or to object to such processing; (f) the r ight to lodge a complaint with a super visor y author ity ; (g) where the personal data are not collected from the data subject, an y av ailable inf or mation as to their source; (h) the existen ce of automa ted decision-making, including prof iling, refer red to in Ar ticle 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful inf or mation about the logic inv olved, as well as the significance and the en visaged consequences of such processing f or the data subject. 2. Where personal data are transferr ed to a third countr y or to an intern ational org anisation, the data subject shall hav e the r ight to be inf or med of the appropr iat e safeg uards pursuant to Ar ticle 46 relating to the transfer . 3. The controller shall pro vide a cop y of the personal data undergoing processing. For any fur ther copies request ed by the data subject, the controller ma y c harge a reasonable f ee based on administrative costs. Where the data subject make s the request by electronic means, and unless other wise requested by the data subject, the inf or mation shall be pro vided in a commonly used electronic f or m. 4. The r ight to obtain a cop y refer red to in paragraph 3 shall not adversely affect the r ights and freedoms of others. Section 3 Rectif ication and erasure Ar ticle 16 Right to rectif ication The data subject shall ha ve the r ight to obtain from the controller without undue dela y the rectificati on of inaccurate personal data concer ning him or her . T aking into account the pur poses of the processing, the data subject shall hav e the r ight to have incomplet e personal data compl eted, including by means of pro viding a supplementar y state ment. Ar ticle 17 Right t o erasure (r ight t o be f orgotten) 1. The data subject shall hav e the r ight to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data concer ning him or her without undue dela y and the controller shall hav e the oblig ation to erase personal data without undue dela y where one of the f ollo wing grounds applies: (a) the personal data are no longer necessar y in relation to the pur poses f or whic h the y were collect ed or other wise processed; 4.5.2016 L 119/43 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) the data subject withdra ws consent on which the processing is based according to point (a) of Ar ticle 6(1), or point (a) of Ar ticle 9(2), and where there is no other leg al ground f or the processing; (c) the data subject objects to the processing pursuant to Ar ticle 21(1) and there are no o ver r iding legitimate grounds f or the processing, or the data subject objects to the processing pursuant to Ar ticle 21(2); (d) the personal data hav e been unlawfull y processed; (e) the personal data ha ve to be erased f or compl iance with a leg al oblig ation in U nion or Member State la w to which the controller is subject ; (f) the personal data have been collected in relation to the offer of inf or mation society ser vices refer red to in Ar ticle 8(1). 2. Where the controller has made the personal data public and is oblig ed pursuant to paragraph 1 to erase the personal data, the controller , taking account of available tec hnology and the cost of im plementation, shall take reasonable steps , including tec hnical measures, to inf or m controllers whic h are processing the personal data that the data subject has request ed the erasure by such controllers of any link s to, or cop y or replication of, those personal data. 3. P aragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the extent that processing is necessar y: (a) f or exercising the r ight of freedom of expression and inf or mation; (b) f or compl iance with a legal obligation which requires processing by U nion or Member State la w to whic h the controller is subject or f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inte rest or in the exer cise of off icial author ity vested in the controller ; (c) f or reasons of public inter est in the area of public health in accordance with points (h) and (i) of Ar ticle 9(2) as well as Ar ticle 9(3); (d) f or arch iving pur poses in the public interest, scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses in accordance with Ar ticle 89(1) in so far as the r ight refer red to in paragraph 1 is lik ely to render imp ossible or ser iously impair the achieve ment of the objectives of that processing; or (e) f or the establishment, exercise or defence of leg al claims. Ar ticle 18 Right to res tr iction of processing 1. The data subject shall ha ve the r ight to obtain from the controller restr iction of processing where one of the f ollo wing applies: (a) the accuracy of the personal data is contest ed by the data subject, f or a per iod enabling the controller to ver ify the accuracy of the personal data; (b) the processing is unlawful and the data subject opposes the erasure of the personal data and requests the restr iction of their use inste ad; (c) the controller no longer needs the personal data f or the pur poses of the processing, but they are required by the data subject f or the establishment, exer cise or defe nce of legal claims; (d) the data subject has objected to processing pursuant to Ar ticle 21(1) pending the ver if ication whether the legitimate grounds of the controller o ver r ide those of the data subject. 2. Where processing has been restr icted under paragraph 1, such personal data shall, with the excep tion of storag e, only be processed with the data subject's consent or f or the establishment, exe rcise or defence of leg al claims or f or the prote ction of the r ights of another natural or leg al person or f or reasons of im por tant public inter est of the U nion or of a Member State . 4.5.2016 L 119/44 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 3. A data subject who has obtained restr iction of processing pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be inf or med by the controller bef ore the restr iction of processing is lif ted. Ar ticle 19 Notif ication obligation regarding rectif ication or erasure of personal data or res tr iction of processing The controller shall communicate any rectifi cation or erasure of personal data or restr iction of processing car r ied out in accordance with Ar ticle 16, Ar ticle 17(1) and Ar ticle 18 to each recipient to whom the personal data hav e been disclosed, unless this pro ves impossible or inv olves dispropor tionate eff or t. The controller shall inf or m the data subject about those recipients if the data subject requests it. Ar ticle 20 Right to dat a por tability 1. The data subject shall have the r ight to receive the personal data concer ning him or her , whic h he or she has pro vided to a controller , in a str uctured, commonly used and machi ne-readable f or mat and hav e the r ight to transmit those data to another controller without hindrance from the controller to which the personal data hav e been pro vided, where: (a) the processing is based on consent pursuant to point (a) of Ar ticle 6(1) or point (a) of Ar ticle 9(2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of Ar ticle 6(1); and (b) the processing is car r ied out by automat ed means. 2. In exercising his or her r ight to data por tability pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject shall hav e the r ight to hav e the personal data transmitted directly from one controller to another , where tec hnically fe asible. 3. The exercise of the r ight refe r red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle shall be without prejudice to Ar ticle 17. That r ight shall not apply to processing necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est or in the exer cise of official author ity vested in the controller . 4. The r ight refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall not adversely aff ect the r ights and freedoms of others. Section 4 Right t o object and automated individual decision-making Ar ticle 21 Right t o object 1. The data subject shall hav e the r ight to object, on grounds relating to his or her par ticular situation, at any time to processing of personal data concer ning him or her which is based on point (e) or (f) of Ar ticle 6(1), including prof iling based on those pro visions. The controller shall no long er process the personal data unless the controller demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds f or the processing whic h o ver r ide the interests, r ights and freedoms of the data subject or f or the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims. 2. Where personal data are processed f or direct marketing pur poses, the data subject shall have the r ight to object at an y time to processing of personal data concer ning him or her f or such mark eting, whic h includes prof iling to the extent that it is relat ed to such direct marketing. 3. Where the data subject objects to processing f or direct mark eting pur poses, the personal data shall no long er be processed f or such pur poses. 4.5.2016 L 119/45 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 4. A t the latest at the time of the fi rst communication with the data subject, the r ight refer red to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be explicitly brought to the attention of the data subject and shall be present ed clearly and separately from an y other inf or mation. 5. In the context of the use of inf or mation society ser vices, and notwithstanding Directive 2002/58/EC, the data subject ma y exer cise his or her r ight to object by automat ed means using tec hnical specifications. 6. Where personal data are processed f or scientific or histo r ical research pur poses or statistical pur poses pursuant to Ar ticle 89(1), the data subject, on grounds relating to his or her par ticular situation, shall have the r ight to object to processing of personal data concer ning him or her , unless the processing is necessar y f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out f or reasons of public inter est. Ar ticle 22 Automated individual decision-making, including prof iling 1. The data subject shall hav e the r ight not to be subject to a decision based solely on automat ed processing, including profiling, which produces leg al effe cts concer ning him or her or similarly signif icantly affe cts him or her . 2. P aragraph 1 shall not apply if the decision: (a) is necessar y f or ent er ing into, or performa nce of, a contract between the data subject and a data controller ; (b) is author ised by U nion or Member State la w to whic h the controller is subject and which also la ys do wn suitable measures to safeguard the data subject's r ights and freedoms and legitimate interests; or (c) is based on the data subject's explicit consent. 3. In the cases ref er red to in points (a) and (c) of paragraph 2, the data controller shall imp lement suitable measures to safeg uard the data subject's r ights and freedoms and legitimate inte rests, at least the r ight to obtain human inter vention on the par t of the controller , to express his or her point of view and to conte st the decision. 4. Decisions refer red to in paragraph 2 shall not be based on special categor ies of personal data refer red to in Ar ticle 9(1), unless point (a) or (g) of Ar ticle 9(2) applies and suitable measures to safeg uard the data subject's r ights and freedoms and legitimate inte rests are in place. Section 5 Restr ictions Ar ticle 23 Rest r ictions 1. U nion or Member Stat e la w to whic h the data controller or processor is subject ma y restr ict by wa y of a legislative measure the scope of the oblig ations and r ights pro vided f or in Ar ticles 12 to 22 and Ar ticle 34, as well as Ar ticle 5 in so far as its pro visions cor respond to the r ights and oblig ations pro vided f or in Ar ticles 12 to 22, when such a restr iction respects the essence of the fundamental r ights and freedoms and is a necessar y and propor tionate measure in a democratic society to safeg uard: (a) national secur ity ; (b) defence; (c) public secur ity ; 4.5.2016 L 119/46 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (d) the prevention, investig ation, det ection or prosecution of cr iminal offences or the executi on of cr iminal penalties, including the safeg uarding aga inst and the prevention of threats to public secur ity ; (e) other impor tant objectives of general public inter est of the U nion or of a Member Stat e, in par ticular an im por tant economic or fi nancial interest of the U nion or of a Member Stat e, including monetar y , budgetary and taxation a matte rs, public health and social secur ity ; (f) the protect ion of judicial independence and judicial proceedings; (g) the prevention, inve stigation, det ection and prosecution of breaches of ethics f or regulated profe ssions; (h) a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected , even occasionally , to the exe rcise of official author ity in the cases refer red to in points (a) to (e) and (g); (i) the protect ion of the data subject or the r ights and freedoms of others; (j) the enf orcement of civil la w claims. 2. In par ticular , any legislative measure refer red to in paragraph 1 shall contain specifi c pro visions at least, where relevant, as to: (a) the pur poses of the processing or catego r ies of processing; (b) the catego r ies of personal data; (c) the scope of the restr ictions introduced; (d) the safeg uards to prevent abuse or unlawful access or transfer; (e) the specifi cation of the controller or catego r ies of controllers; (f) the stor age per iods and the applicable safeguards taking int o account the nature, scope and pur poses of the processing or cate gor ies of processing; (g) the r isks to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects; and (h) the r ight of data subjects to be inf or med about the restr iction, unless that ma y be prejudicial to the pur pose of the restr iction. CHAPTER IV Controller and pr ocessor Section 1 General obligations Ar ticle 24 Responsibility of the controller 1. T aking into account the nature, scope, context and pur poses of processing as well as the r isks of var ying likelihood and sever ity f or the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller shall imp lement appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational measures to ensure and to be able to demonstrate that processing is performed in accordance with this Regulation. Those measures shall be reviewed and update d where necessar y . 2. Where propor tionate in relation to processing activities, the measures refer red to in paragraph 1 shall include the im plementation of appropr iate data prot ection policies by the controller . 3. A dherence to appro ved codes of conduct as refer red to in Ar ticle 40 or appro ved cer tif ication mechanisms as refe r red to in Ar ticle 42 ma y be used as an element by which to demonstrate compl iance with the oblig ations of the controller . 4.5.2016 L 119/47 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 25 Data protection b y design and b y default 1. T aking into account the state of the ar t, the cost of im plementation and the nature, scope, conte xt and pur poses of processing as well as the r isks of var ying likelihood and sever ity f or r ights and freedoms of natural persons posed by the processing, the controller shall, both at the time of the det er mination of the means f or processing and at the time of the processing itself, im plement appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational measures, such as pseudony misation, whic h are designed to implement data-protection pr inciples, such as data minimisation, in an effective manner and to integrat e the necessar y safeg uards into the processing in order to meet the requirements of this Regulation and prote ct the r ights of data subjects. 2. The controller shall im plement appropr iat e te chnical and org anisational measures f or ensur ing that, by default, only personal data whic h are necessar y f or each specific pur pose of the processing are processed. That oblig ation applies to the amount of personal data collected, the extent of their processing, the per iod of their stora ge and their accessibility . In par ticular , such measures shall ensure that by default personal data are not made accessible without the individual's inter vention to an indefinite number of natural persons. 3. An appro ved cer tif ication mecha nism pursuant to Ar ticle 42 ma y be used as an element to demonstrate compl iance with the requirements set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Ar ticle. Ar ticle 26 Joint controllers 1. Where two or more controllers jointly det er mine the pur poses and means of processing, they shall be joint controllers. They shall in a transparent manner determi ne their respective responsibilities f or compliance with the oblig ations under this Regulation, in par ticular as rega rds the exercising of the r ights of the data subject and their respective duties to pro vide the inf or mation refer red to in Ar ticles 13 and 14, by means of an ar rangement between them unless, and in so far as, the respective responsibilities of the controllers are deter mined by U nion or Member State la w to which the controllers are subject. The ar range ment ma y designate a contact point f or data subjects. 2. The ar range ment refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall duly ref lect the respective roles and relationships of the joint controllers vis--vis the data subjects. The essence of the ar rangement shall be made available to the data subject. 3. Ir respective of the term s of the ar rang ement refer red to in paragraph 1, the data subject ma y exercise his or her r ights under this Regulation in respect of and ag ainst each of the controllers. Ar ticle 27 Represent ativ es of controllers or processors not est ablished in the Union 1. Where Ar ticle 3(2) applies, the controller or the processor shall designate in wr iting a representative in the U nion. 2. The obligation laid do wn in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle shall not apply to: (a) processing which is occasional, does not include, on a larg e scale, processing of special cate gor ies of data as refe r red to in Ar ticle 9(1) or processing of personal data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences refe r red to in Ar ticle 10, and is unlikely to result in a r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, taking into account the nature, conte xt, scope and pur poses of the processing; or (b) a public author ity or body . 4.5.2016 L 119/48 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 3. The representative shall be established in one of the Member States where the data subjects, whose personal data are processed in relation to the offer ing of goods or ser vices to them, or whose beha viour is monitored, are. 4. The representative shall be mandate d by the controller or processor to be addressed in addition to or inste ad of the controller or the processor by , in par ticular , super visor y author ities and data subjects, on all issues related to processing, f or the pur poses of ensur ing compliance with this Regulation. 5. The designation of a representative by the controller or processor shall be without prejudice to legal actions whic h could be initiate d ag ainst the controller or the processor themselves. Ar ticle 28 Processor 1. Where processing is to be car r ied out on behalf of a controller , the controller shall use only processors pro viding suffi cient guarantees to im plement appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational measures in such a manner that processing will meet the requirements of this Regulation and ensure the prote ction of the r ights of the data subject. 2. The processor shall not engag e another processor without pr ior specifi c or general wr itt en author isation of the controller . In the case of g eneral wr itten author isation, the processor shall inf or m the controller of any inte nded c hanges concer ning the addition or replacement of other processors, thereby giving the controller the oppor tunity to object to such c hange s. 3. Processing by a processor shall be go ver ned by a contract or other legal act under U nion or Member State la w , that is binding on the processor with rega rd to the controller and that sets out the subject-matt er and duration of the processing, the nature and pur pose of the processing, the type of personal data and cate gor ies of data subjects and the oblig ations and r ights of the controller . That contract or other legal act shall stipulat e, in par ticular , that the processor: (a) processes the personal data only on documented instr uctions from the controller , including with rega rd to transfe rs of personal data to a third countr y or an int er national org anisation, unless required to do so by U nion or Member Stat e la w to whic h the processor is subject ; in such a case, the processor shall inf or m the controller of that lega l requirement bef ore processing, unless that la w prohibits such inf or mation on impor tant grounds of public inter est ; (b) ensures that persons author ised to process the personal data hav e committed themselves to conf identiality or are under an appropr iat e statut or y oblig ation of conf identiality ; (c) take s all measures required pursuant to Ar ticle 32; (d) respects the conditions ref er red to in paragraphs 2 and 4 f or eng aging another processor; (e) taking into account the nature of the processing, assists the controller by appropr iat e te chnical and organisati onal measures, insof ar as this is possible, f or the fulf ilment of the controller's obligation to respond to requests f or exer cising the data subject's r ights laid do wn in Chapt er III; (f) assists the controller in ensur ing compliance with the oblig ations pursuant to Ar ticles 32 to 36 taking into account the nature of processing and the inf or mation ava ilable to the processor; (g) at the choice of the controller , deletes or retur ns all the personal data to the controller af ter the end of the pro vision of ser vices relating to processing, and deletes existing copies unless Union or Member State la w requires stora ge of the personal data; (h) make s av ailable to the controller all inf or mation necessar y to demonstrate compliance with the oblig ations laid do wn in this Ar ticle and allo w f or and contr ibute to audits, including inspections, conducted by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller . 4.5.2016 L 119/49 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN With regar d to point (h) of the fi rst subparagraph, the processor shall immediately inf or m the controller if, in its opinion, an instr uction infr inges this Regulation or other U nion or Member Stat e data prote ction pro visions. 4. Where a processor engag es another processor f or car r ying out specifi c processing activities on behalf of the controller , the same data protect ion oblig ations as set out in the contract or other legal act between the controller and the processor as refe r red to in paragraph 3 shall be imposed on that other processor by wa y of a contract or other legal act under U nion or Member State law , in par ticular pro viding suffi cient guarant ees to im plement appropr iate te chnical and org anisational measures in such a manner that the processing will meet the requirements of this Regulation. Where that other processor fails to fulf il its data protection oblig ations, the initial processor shall remain fully liable to the controller f or the performa nce of that other processor's oblig ations. 5. A dherence of a processor to an appro ved code of conduct as ref er red to in Ar ticle 40 or an appro ved cer tif ication mech anism as ref er red to in Ar ticle 42 ma y be used as an element by which to demonstrate suff icient guarant ees as refe r red to in paragraphs 1 and 4 of this Ar ticle. 6. Without prejudice to an individual contract between the controller and the processor , the contract or the other leg al act refer red to in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Ar ticle ma y be based, in whole or in par t, on standard contractual clauses refe r red to in paragraphs 7 and 8 of this Ar ticle, including when they are par t of a cer tificat ion grant ed to the controller or processor pursuant to Ar ticles 42 and 43. 7. The Commission ma y la y do wn standard contractual clauses f or the matters refer red to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Ar ticle and in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2). 8. A super visor y author ity ma y adopt standard contractual clauses f or the matters refer red to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Ar ticle and in accordance with the consistency mec hanism refer red to in Ar ticle 63. 9. The contract or the other legal act refer red to in paragraphs 3 and 4 shall be in wr iting, including in electronic f or m. 10. Without prejudice to Ar ticles 82, 83 and 84, if a processor infr inges this Regulation by det er mining the pur poses and means of processing, the processor shall be considered to be a controller in respect of that processing. Ar ticle 29 Processing under the author ity of the controller or processor The processor and an y person acting under the author ity of the controller or of the processor , who has access to personal data, shall not process those data excep t on instr uctions from the controller , unless required to do so by U nion or Member Stat e la w . Ar ticle 30 Records of processing activities 1. Each controller and, where applicable, the controller's representative, shall maintain a record of processing activities under its responsibility . That record shall contain all of the f ollo wing inf or mation: (a) the name and contact details of the controller and, where applicable, the joint controller , the controller's representa tive and the data protection off icer; (b) the pur poses of the processing; (c) a descr iption of the categor ies of data subjects and of the cate gor ies of personal data; 4.5.2016 L 119/50 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (d) the catego r ies of recipients to whom the personal data hav e been or will be disclosed including recipients in third countr ies or int er national organisations; (e) where applicable, transfe rs of personal data to a third countr y or an internatio nal org anisation, including the identifi cation of that third countr y or internati onal org anisation and, in the case of transfer s refe r red to in the second subparagraph of Ar ticle 49(1), the documentation of suitable safeg uards; (f) where possible, the envisag ed time limits f or erasure of the different categor ies of data; (g) where possible, a general descr ipt ion of the te chnical and organisational secur ity measures refer red to in Ar ticle 32(1). 2. Each processor and, where applicable, the processor's representative shall maintain a record of all catego r ies of processing activities car r ied out on behalf of a controller , containing: (a) the name and contact details of the processor or processors and of each controller on behalf of which the processor is acting, and, where applicable, of the controller's or the processor's representative, and the data protection off icer; (b) the categor ies of processing car r ied out on behalf of each controller; (c) where applicable, transfe rs of personal data to a third countr y or an internatio nal org anisation, including the identifi cation of that third countr y or internati onal org anisation and, in the case of transfer s refe r red to in the second subparagraph of Ar ticle 49(1), the documentation of suitable safeg uards; (d) where possible, a general descr ipt ion of the te chnical and organisational secur ity measures refer red to in Ar ticle 32(1). 3. The records refe r red to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be in wr iting, including in electronic f or m. 4. The controller or the processor and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's representative, shall make the record av ailable to the super visor y author ity on request. 5. The obligations refer red to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to an enter pr ise or an organisati on emplo ying f ewer than 250 persons unless the processing it car r ies out is like ly to result in a r isk to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, the processing is not occasional, or the processing includes special categor ies of data as refer red to in Ar ticle 9(1) or personal data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences refer red to in Ar ticle 10. Ar ticle 31 Cooperation with the super visor y author ity The controller and the processor and, where applicable, their representatives, shall cooperate , on request, with the super visor y author ity in the performa nce of its tasks. Section 2 Secur ity of personal dat a Ar ticle 32 Secur ity of processing 1. T aking into account the state of the ar t, the costs of implemen tation and the nature, scope, cont ext and pur poses of processing as well as the r isk of var ying lik elihood and sever ity f or the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller and the processor shall im plement appropr iate te chnical and org anisational measures to ensure a level of secur ity appropr iat e to the r isk, including inter alia as appropr iat e: (a) the pseudony misation and encr yption of personal data; 4.5.2016 L 119/51 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) the ability to ensure the ongoing confidentiality , int egr ity , availabi lity and resilience of processing syste ms and ser vices; (c) the ability to restore the av ailability and access to personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or tec hnical incident ; (d) a process f or regularly test ing, assessing and evaluating the eff ectiveness of tec hnical and orga nisational measures f or ensur ing the secur ity of the processing. 2. In assessing the appropr iat e level of secur ity account shall be tak en in par ticular of the r isks that are present ed by processing, in par ticular from accidental or unlawful destr uction, loss, alter ation, unauthor ised disclosure of, or access to personal data transmitted, store d or other wise processed. 3. A dherence to an appro ved code of conduct as refer red to in Ar ticle 40 or an appro ved cer tification mechanis m as refe r red to in Ar ticle 42 ma y be used as an element by which to demonstrate compl iance with the requirements set out in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle. 4. The controller and processor shall tak e ste ps to ensure that any natural person acting under the author ity of the controller or the processor who has access to personal data does not process them excep t on instr uctions from the controller , unless he or she is required to do so by Union or Member State la w . Ar ticle 33 Notif ication of a personal data breach t o the super visor y author ity 1. In the case of a personal data breach, the controller shall without undue dela y and, where f easible, not later than 72 hours af ter hav ing become awar e of it, notify the personal data breac h to the super visor y author ity compet ent in accordance with Ar ticle 55, unless the personal data breac h is unlikely to result in a r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons. Where the notification to the super visor y author ity is not made within 72 hours, it shall be accompan ied by reasons f or the dela y . 2. The processor shall notify the controller without undue dela y af ter becoming aware of a personal data breac h. 3. The notifi cation refer red to in paragraph 1 shall at least: (a) descr ibe the nature of the personal data breac h including where possible, the categor ies and appro ximat e number of data subjects concer ned and the categor ies and appro ximat e number of personal data records concer ned; (b) communicate the name and contact details of the data prote ction officer or other contact point where more inf or mation can be obtained; (c) descr ibe the likely consequences of the personal data breach; (d) descr ibe the measures taken or proposed to be taken by the controller to address the personal data breac h, including, where appropr iat e, measures to mitig ate its possible adverse eff ects. 4. Where, and in so fa r as, it is not possible to pro vide the inf or mation at the same time, the inf or mation ma y be pro vided in phases without undue fur ther dela y . 5. The controller shall document any personal data breac hes, compr ising the f acts relating to the personal data breac h, its effects and the remedial action taken. That documentation shall enable the super visor y author ity to ver ify compl iance with this Ar ticle. Ar ticle 34 Communication of a personal data breach to the dat a subject 1. When the personal data breac h is likely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller shall communicate the personal data breac h to the data subject without undue dela y . 4.5.2016 L 119/52 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. The communication to the data subject refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle shall descr ibe in clear and plain languag e the nature of the personal data breach and contain at least the inf or mation and measures refer red to in points (b), (c) and (d) of Ar ticle 33(3). 3. The communication to the data subject refer red to in paragraph 1 shall not be required if any of the f ollo wing conditions are met: (a) the controller has im plemented appropr iat e tec hnical and org anisational prote ction measures, and those measures were applied to the personal data aff ected by the personal data breac h, in par ticular those that render the personal data unintel ligible to an y person who is not author ised to access it, such as encr yp tion; (b) the controller has take n subsequent measures which ensure that the high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects refer red to in paragraph 1 is no long er likely to mater ialise; (c) it w ould inv olve dispropor tionate eff or t. In such a case, there shall inste ad be a public communication or similar measure whereby the data subjects are inf or med in an equally eff ective manner . 4. If the controller has not already communicated the personal data breach to the data subject, the super visor y author ity , ha ving considered the lik elihood of the personal data breach resulting in a high r isk, ma y require it to do so or ma y decide that any of the conditions ref er red to in paragraph 3 are met. Section 3 Data protection impact assessment and pr ior consultation Ar ticle 35 Data protection impact assessment 1. Where a type of processing in par ticular using new tec hnologies, and taking into account the nature, scope, conte xt and pur poses of the processing, is lik ely to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller shall, pr ior to the processing, car r y out an assessment of the im pact of the en visaged processing operations on the protection of personal data. A sing le assessment ma y address a set of similar processing operations that present similar high r isks . 2. The controller shall seek the advice of the data protect ion off icer , where designated, when car r ying out a data prote ction imp act assessment. 3. A data protection impact assessment refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall in par ticular be required in the case of: (a) a system atic and extensi ve evaluation of personal aspects relating to natural persons which is based on automa ted processing, including prof iling, and on which decisions are based that produce legal effects concer ning the natural person or similarly signif icantly affect the natural person; (b) processing on a large scale of special categor ies of data refer red to in Ar ticle 9(1), or of personal data relating to cr iminal convictions and offences refe r red to in Ar ticle 10; or (c) a system atic monitor ing of a publicly accessible area on a larg e scale. 4. The super visor y author ity shall establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operations whic h are subject to the requirement f or a data protection im pact assessment pursuant to paragraph 1. The super visor y author ity shall communicate those lists to the Board ref er red to in Ar ticle 68. 5. The super visor y author ity ma y also establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operations f or whic h no data protection impact assessment is required. The super visor y author ity shall communicat e those lists to the Board. 6. Pr ior to the adoption of the lists refer red to in paragraphs 4 and 5, the compet ent super visor y author ity shall apply the consist ency mec hanism refer red to in Ar ticle 63 where such lists inv olve processing activities whic h are relat ed to the offer ing of goods or ser vices to data subjects or to the monitori ng of their behavi our in several Member States, or ma y substantially aff ect the free mo vement of personal data within the Union. 4.5.2016 L 119/53 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 7. The assessment shall contain at least: (a) a systemat ic descr iption of the envisag ed processing operations and the pur poses of the processing, including, where applicable, the legitimate interest pursued by the controller; (b) an assessment of the necessity and propor tionality of the processing operations in relation to the pur poses; (c) an assessment of the r isks to the r ights and freedoms of data subjects refer red to in paragraph 1; and (d) the measures en visaged to address the r isks , including safe guards, secur ity measures and mec hanisms to ensure the protect ion of personal data and to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation taking into account the r ights and legitimate interests of data subjects and other persons concer ned. 8. Com pliance with appro ved codes of conduct ref er red to in Ar ticle 40 by the relevant controllers or processors shall be tak en into due account in assessing the im pact of the processing operations performe d by such controllers or processors, in par ticular f or the pur poses of a data protection im pact assessment. 9. Where appropr iat e, the controller shall seek the views of data subjects or their representatives on the intende d processing, without prejudice to the protection of commercial or public interests or the secur ity of processing operations. 10. Where processing pursuant to point (c) or (e) of Ar ticle 6(1) has a legal basis in U nion la w or in the la w of the Member State to which the controller is subject, that la w regulate s the specifi c processing operation or set of operations in question, and a data prot ection impact assessment has already been car r ied out as par t of a g eneral impact assessment in the context of the adoptio n of that lega l basis, paragraphs 1 to 7 shall not apply unless Member Stat es deem it to be necessar y to car r y out such an assessment pr ior to processing activities. 11. Where necessar y , the controller shall car r y out a review to assess if processing is performe d in accordance with the data protect ion impact assessment at least when there is a c hange of the r isk represente d by processing operations. Ar ticle 36 Pr ior consulta tion 1. The controller shall consult the super visor y author ity pr ior to processing where a data prot ection im pact assessment under Ar ticle 35 indicate s that the processing w ould result in a high r isk in the absence of measures tak en by the controller to mitig ate the r isk. 2. Where the super visor y author ity is of the opinion that the intended processing refer red to in paragraph 1 w ould infr inge this Regulation, in par ticular where the controller has insufficiently identif ied or mitig ated the r isk, the super visor y author ity shall, within per iod of up to eight weeks of receipt of the request f or consultation, pro vide wr itten advice to the controller and, where applicable to the processor , and ma y use an y of its po wers refe r red to in Ar ticle 58. That per iod ma y be extended by six weeks, taking into account the complexity of the intende d processing. The super visor y author ity shall inf or m the controller and, where applicable, the processor , of any such extensi on within one month of receipt of the request f or consultation tog ether with the reasons f or the dela y . Those per iods ma y be suspended until the super visor y author ity has obtained inf or mation it has requeste d f or the pur poses of the consultation. 3. When consulting the super visor y author ity pursuant to paragraph 1, the controller shall pro vide the super visor y author ity with: (a) where applicable, the respective responsibilities of the controller , joint controllers and processors inv olved in the processing, in par ticular f or processing within a group of under takings; (b) the pur poses and means of the intended processing; (c) the measures and safeguards pro vided to protect the r ights and freedoms of data subjects pursuant to this Regulation; (d) where applicable, the contact details of the data prot ection office r; 4.5.2016 L 119/54 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (e) the data protection impact assessment pro vided f or in Ar ticle 35; and (f) any other inf or mation request ed by the super visor y author ity . 4. Member Stat es shall consult the super visor y author ity dur ing the preparation of a proposal f or a legislative measure to be adopt ed by a national parliament, or of a regulatory measure based on such a legislative measure, which relat es to processing. 5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Member State la w ma y require controllers to consult with, and obtain pr ior author isation from, the super visor y author ity in relation to processing by a controller f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out by the controller in the public inte rest, including processing in relation to social prote ction and public health. Section 4 Dat a protection off icer Ar ticle 37 Designation of the data protection off icer 1. The controller and the processor shall designat e a data prot ection office r in any case where: (a) the processing is car r ied out by a public author ity or body , excep t f or cour ts acting in their judicial capacity ; (b) the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of processing operations whic h, by vir tue of their nature, their scope and/or their pur poses, require regular and systema tic monitori ng of data subjects on a large scale; or (c) the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of processing on a larg e scale of special categor ies of data pursuant to Ar ticle 9 and personal data relating to cr iminal con victions and off ences refer red to in Ar ticle 10. 2. A group of under takings ma y appoint a sing le data protection officer pro vided that a data protection officer is easily accessible from each establishment. 3. Where the controller or the processor is a public author ity or body , a sing le data prot ection officer ma y be designat ed f or several such author ities or bodies, taking account of their organisational str ucture and size. 4. In cases other than those refe r red to in paragraph 1, the controller or processor or associations and other bodies representing catego r ies of controllers or processors ma y or , where required by Union or Member Stat e la w shall, designat e a data prote ction off icer . The data prot ection office r ma y act f or such associations and other bodies representing controllers or processors. 5. The data protection off icer shall be designate d on the basis of profess ional qualities and, in par ticular , exper t kno wledge of data prot ection la w and practices and the ability to fulfil the tasks refer red to in Ar ticle 39. 6. The data prote ction officer ma y be a staff member of the controller or processor , or fulfil the task s on the basis of a ser vice contract. 7. The controller or the processor shall publish the contact details of the data prot ection off icer and communicate them to the super visor y author ity . Ar ticle 38 P osition of the data protection off icer 1. The controller and the processor shall ensure that the data prot ection off icer is inv olved, properly and in a timely manner , in all issues which relat e to the prot ection of personal data. 4.5.2016 L 119/55 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. The controller and processor shall suppor t the data protect ion off icer in perf or ming the tasks refer red to in Ar ticle 39 by pro viding resources necessar y to car r y out those tasks and access to personal data and processing operations, and to maintain his or her exper t kno wledge. 3. The controller and processor shall ensure that the data prot ection off icer does not receive any instr uctions regar ding the exer cise of those tasks. He or she shall not be dismissed or penalised by the controller or the processor f or performin g his tasks. The data protection off icer shall directly repor t to the highest manage ment level of the controller or the processor . 4. Data subjects ma y contact the data prot ection officer with regard to all issues relat ed to processing of their personal data and to the exercise of their r ights under this Regulation. 5. The data prot ection officer shall be bound by secrecy or conf identiality concer ning the perf or mance of his or her tasks, in accordance with Union or Member Stat e la w . 6. The data prote ction off icer ma y fulfil other tasks and duties. The controller or processor shall ensure that any such tasks and duties do not result in a conf lict of inte rests. Ar ticle 39 T ask s of the dat a protection off icer 1. The data protection officer shall hav e at least the f ollo wing tasks: (a) to inf or m and advise the controller or the processor and the em plo ye es who car r y out processing of their oblig ations pursuant to this Regulation and to other Union or Member Stat e data prote ction pro visions; (b) to monitor compliance with this Regulation, with other U nion or Member Stat e data prote ction pro visions and with the policies of the controller or processor in relation to the prote ction of personal data, including the assignment of responsibilities, awareness-raising and training of staff inv olved in processing operations, and the relat ed audits; (c) to pro vide advice where request ed as rega rds the data prot ection im pact assessment and monitor its perf or mance pursuant to Ar ticle 35; (d) to cooperate with the super visor y author ity ; (e) to act as the contact point f or the super visor y author ity on issues relating to processing, including the pr ior consultation refer red to in Ar ticle 36, and to consult, where appropr iate, with regar d to an y other matter . 2. The data prote ction office r shall in the performa nce of his or her tasks hav e due regar d to the r isk associated with processing operations, taking into account the nature, scope, cont ext and pur poses of processing. Section 5 Codes of conduct and cer tif ication Ar ticle 40 Codes of conduct 1. The Member Stat es, the super visor y author ities, the Board and the Commission shall encourage the drawing up of codes of conduct inte nded to contr ibut e to the proper application of this Regulation, taking account of the specifi c f eatures of the var ious processing sectors and the specifi c needs of micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises. 2. Associations and other bodies representing categor ies of controllers or processors ma y prepare codes of conduct, or amend or extend such codes, f or the pur pose of specifying the application of this Regulation, such as with regard to: (a) f air and transparent processing; 4.5.2016 L 119/56 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) the legitimate interests pursued by controllers in specifi c cont exts; (c) the collection of personal data; (d) the pseudony misation of personal data; (e) the inf or mation pro vided to the public and to data subjects; (f) the exercise of the r ights of data subjects; (g) the inf or mation pro vided to, and the protection of, c hildren, and the manner in whic h the consent of the holders of parental responsibility o ver c hildren is to be obtained; (h) the measures and procedures refer red to in Ar ticles 24 and 25 and the measures to ensure secur ity of processing refer red to in Ar ticle 32; (i) the notificati on of personal data breaches to super visor y author ities and the communication of such personal data breac hes to data subjects; (j) the transfer of personal data to third countr ies or intern ational organisations; or (k) out-of-cour t proceedings and other dispute resolution procedures f or resolving disputes between controllers and data subjects with regard to processing, without prejudice to the r ights of data subjects pursuant to Ar ticles 77 and 79. 3. In addition to adherence by controllers or processors subject to this Regulation, codes of conduct appro ved pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Ar ticle and hav ing general validity pursuant to paragraph 9 of this Ar ticle ma y also be adhered to by controllers or processors that are not subject to this Regulation pursuant to Ar ticle 3 in order to pro vide appropr iate safeg uards within the framew ork of personal data transfer s to third countr ies or international orga nisations under the term s refe r red to in point (e) of Ar ticle 46(2). Such controllers or processors shall make binding and enf orceable commitments, via contractual or other leg ally binding instr uments, to apply those appropr iate safeguards including with regar d to the r ights of data subjects. 4. A code of conduct refe r red to in paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle shall contain mech anisms whic h enable the body refe r red to in Ar ticle 41(1) to car r y out the mandat or y monitoring of compliance with its pro visions by the controllers or processors whic h under take to apply it, without prejudice to the tasks and po wers of super visor y author ities compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56. 5. Associations and other bodies refer red to in paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle whic h intend to prepare a code of conduct or to amend or exte nd an existing code shall submit the draf t code, amendment or ext ension to the super visor y author ity which is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55. The super visor y author ity shall pro vide an opinion on whether the draf t code, amendment or exte nsion compl ies with this Regulation and shall appro ve that draf t code, amendment or extensi on if it find s that it pro vides suffi cient appropr iat e safeg uards. 6. Where the draf t code, or amendment or extension is appro ved in accordance with paragraph 5, and where the code of conduct concer ned does not relat e to processing activities in several Member Stat es, the super visor y author ity shall register and publish the code. 7. Where a draf t code of conduct relates to processing activities in several Member Stat es, the super visor y author ity whic h is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 shall, bef ore appro ving the draf t code, amendment or exte nsion, submit it in the procedure refe r red to in Ar ticle 63 to the Board whic h shall pro vide an opinion on whether the draf t code, amendment or exte nsion complies with this Regulation or , in the situation refe r red to in paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle, pro vides appropr iate safeguards. 8. Where the opinion refe r red to in paragraph 7 conf ir ms that the draf t code, amendment or extension complies with this Regulation, or , in the situation refe r red to in paragraph 3, pro vides appropr iat e safeguards, the Board shall submit its opinion to the Commission. 9. The Commission ma y , by wa y of im plementing acts, decide that the appro ved code of conduct, amendment or extensi on submitte d to it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Ar ticle have general validity within the U nion. Those im plementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure set out in Ar ticle 93(2). 4.5.2016 L 119/57 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 10. The Commission shall ensure appropr iat e publicity f or the appro ved codes whic h hav e been decided as having ge neral validity in accordance with paragraph 9. 11. The Board shall collat e all appro ved codes of conduct, amendments and extensi ons in a register and shall mak e them publicly av ailable by wa y of appropr iat e means. Ar ticle 41 Monito r ing of appro v ed codes of conduct 1. Without prejudice to the tasks and po wers of the compet ent super visor y author ity under Ar ticles 57 and 58, the monitoring of compl iance with a code of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 40 ma y be car r ied out by a body whic h has an appropr iate level of exper tise in relation to the subject-matt er of the code and is accredited f or that pur pose by the compet ent super visor y author ity . 2. A body as refer red to in paragraph 1 ma y be accredit ed to monit or compl iance with a code of conduct where that body has: (a) demonstrated its independence and exper tise in relation to the subject-matte r of the code to the satisf action of the compet ent super visor y author ity ; (b) established procedures which allo w it to assess the eligibility of controllers and processors concer ned to apply the code, to monitor their compl iance with its pro visions and to per iodically review its operation; (c) established procedures and str uctures to handle compl aints about infr ingements of the code or the manner in whic h the code has been, or is being, implemen ted by a controller or processor , and to make those procedures and str uctures transparent to data subjects and the public; and (d) demonstrated to the satisf action of the compet ent super visor y author ity that its tasks and duties do not result in a conf lict of inter ests. 3. The compet ent super visor y author ity shall submit the draf t cr it er ia f or accreditation of a body as refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle to the Board pursuant to the consiste ncy mecha nism refe r red to in Ar ticle 63. 4. Without prejudice to the tasks and po wers of the compet ent super visor y author ity and the pro visions of Chapt er VIII, a body as refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle shall, subject to appropr iat e safeg uards, take appropr iate action in cases of infr ing ement of the code by a controller or processor , including suspension or excl usion of the controller or processor concer ned from the code. It shall inf or m the compe tent super visor y author ity of such actions and the reasons f or taking them. 5. The compet ent super visor y author ity shall revok e the accreditation of a body as refer red to in paragraph 1 if the conditions f or accreditation are not, or are no long er , met or where actions taken by the body infr inge this Regulation. 6. This Ar ticle shall not apply to processing car r ied out by public author ities and bodies. Ar ticle 42 Cer tif ication 1. The Member State s, the super visor y author ities, the Board and the Commission shall encourag e, in par ticular at U nion level, the establishment of data protect ion cer tification mech anisms and of data protection seals and marks, f or the pur pose of demonstrating compliance with this Regulation of processing operations by controllers and processors. The specif ic needs of micro, small and medium-sized ent er pr ises shall be take n into account. 4.5.2016 L 119/58 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. In addition to adherence by controllers or processors subject to this Regulation, data prot ection cer tificat ion mech anisms, seals or marks appro ved pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Ar ticle ma y be established f or the pur pose of demonstrating the existen ce of appropr iate safeguards pro vided by controllers or processors that are not subject to this Regulation pursuant to Ar ticle 3 within the framewor k of personal data transfe rs to third countr ies or international org anisations under the te r ms refer red to in point (f) of Ar ticle 46(2). Such controllers or processors shall mak e binding and enf orceable commitments, via contractual or other leg ally binding instr uments, to apply those appropr iat e safeg uards, including with rega rd to the r ights of data subjects. 3. The cer tificat ion shall be voluntar y and available via a process that is transparent. 4. A cer tif ication pursuant to this Ar ticle does not reduce the responsibility of the controller or the processor f or compl iance with this Regulation and is without prejudice to the tasks and po wers of the super visor y author ities whic h are compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56. 5. A cer tif ication pursuant to this Ar ticle shall be issued by the cer tif ication bodies refe r red to in Ar ticle 43 or by the compet ent super visor y author ity , on the basis of cr iter ia appro ved by that compet ent super visor y author ity pursuant to Ar ticle 58(3) or by the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 63. Where the cr it er ia are appro ved by the Board, this ma y result in a common cer tification, the European Data Protection Seal. 6. The controller or processor which submits its processing to the cer tif ication mechani sm shall pro vide the cer tifi cation body refer red to in Ar ticle 43, or where applicable, the compet ent super visor y author ity , with all inf or mation and access to its processing activities which are necessar y to conduct the cer tification procedure. 7. Cer tification shall be issued to a controller or processor f or a maximum per iod of three ye ars and ma y be renewed, under the same conditions, pro vided that the relevant requirements continue to be met. Cer tif ication shall be withdra wn, as applicable, by the cer tif ication bodies refe r red to in Ar ticle 43 or by the compet ent super visor y author ity where the requirements f or the cer tificat ion are not or are no long er met. 8. The Board shall collate all cer tif ication mecha nisms and data prote ction seals and marks in a register and shall make them publicly available by an y appropr iate means. Ar ticle 43 Cer tif ication bodies 1. Without prejudice to the task s and po wers of the compe tent super visor y author ity under Ar ticles 57 and 58, cer tification bodies whic h hav e an appropr iat e level of exper tise in relation to data protection shall, af ter inf or ming the super visor y author ity in order to allo w it to exe rcise its po wers pursuant to point (h) of Ar ticle 58(2) where necessar y , issue and renew cer tificat ion. Member Stat es shall ensure that those cer tificat ion bodies are accredited by one or both of the f ollo wing: (a) the super visor y author ity whic h is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56; (b) the national accreditation body named in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) in accordance with EN-ISO/IEC 17065/2012 and with the additional requirements established by the super visor y author ity which is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56. 2. Cer tification bodies refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall be accredit ed in accordance with that paragraph only where the y ha ve: (a) demonstrated their independence and exper tise in relation to the subject-matter of the cer tif ication to the satisf action of the compet ent super visor y author ity ; 4.5.2016 L 119/59 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements f or accredi tation and market sur veillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 (OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30). (b) under take n to respect the cr ite r ia refer red to in Ar ticle 42(5) and appro ved by the super visor y author ity whic h is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56 or by the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 63; (c) established procedures f or the issuing, per iodic review and withdra wal of data protection cer tif ication, seals and marks ; (d) established procedures and str uctures to handle compl aints about infr ing ements of the cer tification or the manner in which the cer tification has been, or is being, implement ed by the controller or processor , and to make those procedures and str uctures transparent to data subjects and the public; and (e) demonstrated , to the satisfaction of the compet ent super visor y author ity , that their task s and duties do not result in a conf lict of inte rests. 3. The accreditation of cer tificat ion bodies as ref er red to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Ar ticle shall take place on the basis of cr iter ia appro ved by the super visor y author ity which is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 55 or 56 or by the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 63. In the case of accreditation pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle, those requirements shall compl ement those envi saged in Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 and the tec hnical r ules that descr ibe the methods and procedures of the cer tification bodies. 4. The cer tification bodies ref er red to in paragraph 1 shall be responsible f or the proper assessment leading to the cer tification or the withdrawal of such cer tification without prejudice to the responsibility of the controller or processor f or compl iance with this Regulation. The accreditation shall be issued f or a maximum per iod of fi ve yea rs and ma y be renewed on the same conditions pro vided that the cer tificat ion body meets the requirements set out in this Ar ticle. 5. The cer tificat ion bodies ref er red to in paragraph 1 shall pro vide the compet ent super visor y author ities with the reasons f or granting or withdrawing the requeste d cer tification. 6. The requirements refer red to in paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle and the cr it er ia ref er red to in Ar ticle 42(5) shall be made public by the super visor y author ity in an easily accessible f or m. The super visor y author ities shall also transmit those requirements and cr it er ia to the Board. The Board shall collate all cer tification mechanisms and data prot ection seals in a register and shall make them publicly available by any appropr iate means. 7. Without prejudice to Chapt er VIII, the compet ent super visor y author ity or the national accreditation body shall revok e an accreditation of a cer tif ication body pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle where the conditions f or the accreditation are not, or are no longer , met or where actions take n by a cer tif ication body infr ing e this Regulation. 8. The Commission shall be empo wered to adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Ar ticle 92 f or the pur pose of specifying the requirements to be tak en into account f or the data prote ction cer tificat ion mech anisms refe r red to in Ar ticle 42(1). 9. The Commission ma y adopt im plementing acts la ying do wn tec hnical standards f or cer tif ication mecha nisms and data protect ion seals and marks, and mecha nisms to promot e and recognise those cer tif ication mechani sms, seals and marks . Those implementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2). CHAPTER V T r ansf ers of personal data to thir d countr ies or inter national org anisations Ar ticle 44 General pr inciple for transfer s Any transfer of personal data which are undergoing processing or are int ended f or processing af te r transfer to a third countr y or to an intern ational organisation shall take place only if, subject to the other pro visions of this Regulation, the conditions laid do wn in this Chapt er are compl ied with by the controller and processor , including f or on ward transfe rs of personal data from the third countr y or an int er national org anisation to another third countr y or to another intern at ional org anisation. All pro visions in this Chapt er shall be applied in order to ensure that the level of prot ection of natural persons guarant eed by this Regulation is not under mined. 4.5.2016 L 119/60 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 45 T ransfers on the basis of an adequacy decision 1. A transfer of personal data to a third countr y or an international org anisation ma y tak e place where the Commission has decided that the third countr y , a te r r it or y or one or more specified sect ors within that third countr y , or the inte r national organisation in question ensures an adequate level of protection. Such a transfe r shall not require an y specific author isation. 2. When assessing the adequacy of the level of protection, the Commission shall, in par ticular , take account of the f ollo wing elements: (a) the r ule of law , respect f or human r ights and fundamental freedoms, relevant legislation, both general and sect oral, including concer ning public secur ity , defence, national secur ity and cr iminal la w and the access of public author ities to personal data, as well as the implementation of such legislation, data prote ction r ules, profes sional r ules and secur ity measures, including r ules f or the on ward transfer of personal data to another third countr y or inte r national org anisation which are compl ied with in that countr y or intern ational org anisation, case-law , as well as effe ctive and enf orceable data subject r ights and effective administrative and judicial redress f or the data subjects whose personal data are being transferred; (b) the existen ce and effe ctive functioning of one or more independent super visor y author ities in the third countr y or to which an intern ational org anisation is subject, with responsibility f or ensur ing and enf orcing compl iance with the data protection r ules, including adequate enf orcement po wers, f or assisting and advising the data subjects in exer cising their r ights and f or cooperation with the super visor y author ities of the Member State s; and (c) the intern ational commitments the third countr y or internati onal organisation concer ned has entered into, or other oblig ations ar ising from leg ally binding conventions or instr uments as well as from its par ticipation in multilat eral or regional system s, in par ticular in relation to the protection of personal data. 3. The Commission, af ter assessing the adequacy of the level of protection, ma y decide, by means of imple menting act, that a third countr y , a terr it or y or one or more specifi ed sectors within a third countr y , or an inte r national org anisation ensures an adequate level of prot ection within the meaning of paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle. The im plementing act shall pro vide f or a mecha nism f or a per iodic review , at least ever y f our ye ars, whic h shall take into account all relevant developments in the third countr y or intern ational org anisation. The imple menting act shall specify its terr itorial and sectoral application and, where applicable, identify the super visor y author ity or author ities refer red to in point (b) of paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle. The im plementing act shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2). 4. The Commission shall, on an ongoing basis, monitor developments in third countr ies and international org an isations that could aff ect the functioning of decisions adopt ed pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle and decisions adopt ed on the basis of Ar ticle 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC. 5. The Commission shall, where av ailable inf or mation reveals, in par ticular f ollo wing the review refe r red to in paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle, that a third countr y , a terr it or y or one or more specified sector s within a third countr y , or an inte r national organisation no long er ensures an adequate level of prote ction within the meaning of paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle, to the ext ent necessar y , repeal, amend or suspend the decision refer red to in paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle by means of implementing acts without retro-active effect. Those implementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2). On duly justified imperative grounds of urg ency , the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable imple menting acts in accordance with the procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(3). 6. The Commission shall ent er into consultations with the third countr y or international organisation with a view to remedying the situation giving r ise to the decision made pursuant to paragraph 5. 7. A decision pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Ar ticle is without prejudice to transfer s of personal data to the third countr y , a terr itory or one or more specifi ed sector s within that third countr y , or the intern ational orga nisation in question pursuant to Ar ticles 46 to 49. 8. The Commission shall publish in the Off icial Jour nal of the Europ ean Union and on its website a list of the third countr ies, te r r it or ies and specifi ed sect ors within a third countr y and internati onal organisations f or whic h it has decided that an adequate level of protection is or is no long er ensured. 4.5.2016 L 119/61 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 9. Decisions adopt ed by the Commission on the basis of Ar ticle 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in f orce until amended, replaced or repealed by a Commission Decision adop ted in accordance with paragraph 3 or 5 of this Ar ticle. Ar ticle 46 T ransfers subject to appropr iate safeguards 1. In the absence of a decision pursuant to Ar ticle 45(3), a controller or processor ma y transfer personal data to a third countr y or an internati onal organisati on only if the controller or processor has pro vided appropr iate safeg uards, and on condition that enf orceable data subject r ights and effe ctive leg al remedies f or data subjects are ava ilable. 2. The appropr iate safeg uards refer red to in paragraph 1 ma y be pro vided f or , without requir ing any specifi c author is ation from a super visor y author ity , by: (a) a leg ally binding and enf orceable instr ument between public author ities or bodies; (b) binding cor porate r ules in accordance with Ar ticle 47; (c) standard data prote ction clauses adop ted by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2); (d) standard data prot ection clauses adopt ed by a super visor y author ity and appro ved by the Commission pursuant to the examination procedure refe r red to in Ar ticle 93(2); (e) an appro ved code of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 40 tog ether with binding and enf orceable commitments of the controller or processor in the third countr y to apply the appropr iate safegua rds, including as regar ds data subjects' r ights; or (f) an appro ved cer tificat ion mech anism pursuant to Ar ticle 42 tog ether with binding and enf orceable commitments of the controller or processor in the third countr y to apply the appropr iate safeguards, including as regards data subjects' r ights. 3. Subject to the author isation from the compet ent super visor y author ity , the appropr iate safeguards refer red to in paragraph 1 ma y also be pro vided f or , in par ticular , by: (a) contractual clauses between the controller or processor and the controller , processor or the recipient of the personal data in the third countr y or intern ational org anisation; or (b) pro visions to be inser ted into administrative ar rangements between public author ities or bodies whic h include enf orceable and eff ective data subject r ights. 4. The super visor y author ity shall apply the consist ency mech anism ref er red to in Ar ticle 63 in the cases refer red to in paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle. 5. A uthor isations by a Member State or super visor y author ity on the basis of Ar ticle 26(2) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain valid until amended, replaced or repealed, if necessar y , by that super visor y author ity . Decisions adop ted by the Commission on the basis of Ar ticle 26(4) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in f orce until amended, replaced or repealed, if necessar y , by a Commission Decision adopt ed in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle. Ar ticle 47 Binding cor porate r ules 1. The compe tent super visor y author ity shall appro ve binding cor porat e r ules in accordance with the consistency mech anism set out in Ar ticle 63, pro vided that the y: (a) are leg ally binding and apply to and are enf orced by ever y member concer ned of the group of under takings, or group of enterpr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity , including their emplo y ees; 4.5.2016 L 119/62 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) expressly confe r enf orceable r ights on data subjects with rega rd to the processing of their personal data; and (c) fulf il the requirements laid do wn in paragraph 2. 2. The binding cor porate r ules refer red to in paragraph 1 shall specify at least: (a) the str ucture and contact details of the group of under takings, or group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity and of each of its members; (b) the data transfer s or set of transfers, including the cate gor ies of personal data, the type of processing and its pur poses, the type of data subjects affect ed and the identif ication of the third countr y or countr ies in question; (c) their legally binding nature, both internall y and extern ally ; (d) the application of the g eneral data protection pr inciples, in par ticular pur pose limitation, data minimisation, limited stora ge per iods, data quality , data protection by design and by defa ult, lega l basis f or processing, processing of special catego r ies of personal data, measures to ensure data secur ity , and the requirements in respect of onwa rd transfer s to bodies not bound by the binding cor porat e r ules; (e) the r ights of data subjects in regar d to processing and the means to exercise those r ights, including the r ight not to be subject to decisions based solely on automat ed processing, including profiling in accordance with Ar ticle 22, the r ight to lodge a complaint with the compet ent super visor y author ity and bef ore the compet ent cour ts of the Member States in accordance with Ar ticle 79, and to obtain redress and, where appropr iat e, compensation f or a breac h of the binding cor porat e r ules; (f) the acceptance by the controller or processor established on the terr it or y of a Member Stat e of liability f or any breac hes of the binding cor porate r ules by any member concer ned not established in the U nion; the controller or the processor shall be exe mp t from that liability , in whole or in par t, only if it pro ves that that member is not responsible f or the event giving r ise to the damage; (g) ho w the inf or mation on the binding cor porat e r ules, in par ticular on the pro visions refer red to in points (d), (e) and (f) of this paragraph is pro vided to the data subjects in addition to Ar ticles 13 and 14; (h) the tasks of any data protection off icer designat ed in accordance with Ar ticle 37 or an y other person or entity in c harge of the monitori ng compliance with the binding cor porate r ules within the group of under takings, or group of enterpr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity , as well as monitori ng training and compl aint-handling; (i) the compl aint procedures; (j) the mechanis ms within the group of under takings, or group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity f or ensur ing the ver if ication of compliance with the binding cor porate r ules. Such mechanis ms shall include data prote ction audits and methods f or ensur ing cor rective actions to prote ct the r ights of the data subject. Results of such ver ification should be communicated to the person or entity refe r red to in point (h) and to the board of the controlling under taking of a group of under takings, or of the group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity , and should be available upon request to the compet ent super visor y author ity ; (k) the mech anisms f or repor ting and recording c hanges to the r ules and repor ting those c hange s to the super visor y author ity ; (l) the cooperation mec hanism with the super visor y author ity to ensure compliance by an y member of the group of under takings, or group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity , in par ticular by making av ailable to the super visor y author ity the results of ver ifications of the measures refer red to in point (j); (m) the mecha nisms f or repor ting to the compe tent super visor y author ity any leg al requirements to which a member of the group of under takings, or group of ent er pr ises enga ged in a joint economic activity is subject in a third countr y which are likely to hav e a substantial adverse eff ect on the guarantees pro vided by the binding cor porat e r ules; and (n) the appropr iat e data prot ection training to personnel hav ing per manent or regular access to personal data. 4.5.2016 L 119/63 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 3. The Commission ma y specify the f or mat and procedures f or the exc hang e of inf or mation between controllers, processors and super visor y author ities f or binding cor porate r ules within the meaning of this Ar ticle. Those im plementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure set out in Ar ticle 93(2). Ar ticle 48 T ransfers or disclosures not author ised b y Union la w Any judgment of a cour t or tr ibunal and an y decision of an administrative author ity of a third countr y requir ing a controller or processor to transfer or disclose personal data ma y only be recognised or enf orceable in an y manner if based on an inte r national agreement, such as a mutual legal assistance treaty , in f orce between the requesting third countr y and the Union or a Member Stat e, without prejudice to other grounds f or transfer pursuant to this Chapt er . Ar ticle 49 Derogations f or specif ic situations 1. In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to Ar ticle 45(3), or of appropr iat e safeg uards pursuant to Ar ticle 46, including binding cor porate r ules, a transfer or a set of transfer s of personal data to a third countr y or an in ternatio nal org anisation shall take place only on one of the f ollo wing conditions: (a) the data subject has explicitly consented to the proposed transfe r , af ter hav ing been inf or med of the possible r isks of such transfer s f or the data subject due to the absence of an adequacy decision and appropr iat e safeg uards; (b) the transfer is necessar y f or the performa nce of a contract between the data subject and the controller or the imp lementation of pre-contractual measures taken at the data subject's request ; (c) the transfer is necessar y f or the conclusion or performa nce of a contract concluded in the interest of the data subject between the controller and another natural or leg al person; (d) the transfer is necessar y f or im por tant reasons of public interest ; (e) the transfer is necessar y f or the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; (f) the transfer is necessar y in order to prot ect the vital inter ests of the data subject or of other persons, where the data subject is phy sically or leg ally incapable of giving consent ; (g) the transfer is made from a register which according to Union or Member Stat e la w is intended to pro vide inf or mation to the public and whic h is open to consultation either by the public in g eneral or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate interest, but only to the exte nt that the conditions laid do wn by U nion or Member Stat e la w f or consultation are fulfilled in the par ticular case. Where a transfer could not be based on a pro vision in Ar ticle 45 or 46, including the pro visions on binding cor porate r ules, and none of the derog ations f or a specific situation refer red to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph is applicable, a transfer to a third countr y or an inte r national org anisation ma y tak e place only if the transfer is not repetitive, concer ns only a limited number of data subjects, is necessar y f or the pur poses of compelling legitimate inter ests pursued by the controller which are not o ver r idden by the inte rests or r ights and freedoms of the data subject, and the controller has assessed all the circumstances sur rounding the data transfer and has on the basis of that assessment pro vided suitable safeg uards with regard to the protection of personal data. The controller shall inf or m the super visor y author ity of the transfer . The controller shall, in addition to pro viding the inf or mation ref er red to in Ar ticles 13 and 14, inf or m the data subject of the transfer and on the compe lling legitimate inter ests pursued. 2. A transfe r pursuant to point (g) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall not inv olve the entirety of the personal data or entire catego r ies of the personal data contained in the register . Where the register is int ended f or consultation by persons having a legitimate interest, the transfer shall be made only at the request of those persons or if the y are to be the recipients. 4.5.2016 L 119/64 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 3. P oints (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 and the second subparagraph thereof shall not apply to activities car r ied out by public author ities in the exe rcise of their public po wers. 4. The public interest refer red to in point (d) of the fi rst subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be recognised in U nion la w or in the la w of the Member Stat e to which the controller is subject. 5. In the absence of an adequacy decision, U nion or Member State la w ma y , f or im por tant reasons of public interest, expressly set limits to the transfer of specific catego r ies of personal data to a third countr y or an internatio nal org anisation. Member Stat es shall notify such pro visions to the Commission. 6. The controller or processor shall document the assessment as well as the suitable safeg uards refer red to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle in the records refe r red to in Ar ticle 30. Ar ticle 50 Inter national cooperation fo r the protection of personal dat a In relation to third countr ies and internatio nal org anisations, the Commission and super visor y author ities shall take appropr iate steps to: (a) develop internati onal cooperation mec hanisms to f acilitate the effe ctive enf orcement of legislation f or the prot ection of personal data; (b) pro vide internati onal mutual assistance in the enf orcement of legislation f or the protection of personal data, including through notification, compl aint ref er ral, inv estigative assistance and inf or mation exc hange , subject to appropr iat e safeg uards f or the protection of personal data and other fundamental r ights and freedoms; (c) engag e relevant stake holders in discussion and activities aimed at fur ther ing international cooperation in the enf orcement of legislation f or the prote ction of personal data; (d) promote the exc hange and documentation of personal data prote ction legislation and practice, including on jur isdic tional conf licts with third countr ies. CHAPTER VI Independent super visor y author ities Section 1 Independent st atus Ar ticle 51 Super visor y author ity 1. Each Member Stat e shall pro vide f or one or more independent public author ities to be responsible f or monitori ng the application of this Regulation, in order to protect the fundamental r ights and freedoms of natural persons in relation to processing and to f acilitate the free f lo w of personal data within the U nion (super visor y author ity). 2. Each super visor y author ity shall contr ibute to the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Uni on. For that pur pose, the super visor y author ities shall cooperat e with each other and the Commission in accordance with Chapt er VII. 3. Where more than one super visor y author ity is established in a Member Stat e, that Member State shall designat e the super visor y author ity which is to represent those author ities in the Board and shall set out the mechanis m to ensure compl iance by the other author ities with the r ules relating to the consiste ncy mechani sm refe r red to in Ar ticle 63. 4. Each Member Stat e shall notify to the Commission the pro visions of its law which it adopts pursuant to this Chapt er , by 25 Ma y 2018 and, without dela y , an y subsequent amendment affectin g them. 4.5.2016 L 119/65 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 52 Independence 1. Each super visor y author ity shall act with compl ete independence in performin g its tasks and exercising its po wers in accordance with this Regulation. 2. The member or members of each super visor y author ity shall, in the performa nce of their tasks and exercise of their po wers in accordance with this Regulation, remain free from external inf luence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek nor take instr uctions from anybody . 3. Member or members of each super visor y author ity shall refrain from an y action incompati ble with their duties and shall not, dur ing their term of office, engag e in any incompati ble occupation, whether g ainful or not. 4. Each Member Stat e shall ensure that each super visor y author ity is pro vided with the human, tec hnical and financia l resources, premises and infrastr ucture necessar y f or the eff ective perf or mance of its task s and exer cise of its po wers, including those to be car r ied out in the context of mutual assistance, cooperation and par ticipation in the Board. 5. Each Member State shall ensure that each super visor y author ity choo ses and has its o wn staff which shall be subject to the exclusive direction of the member or members of the super visor y author ity concer ned. 6. Each Member State shall ensure that each super visor y author ity is subject to financia l control whic h does not affe ct its independence and that it has separate , public annual budge ts, whic h ma y be par t of the o verall state or national budget. Ar ticle 53 General conditions for the members of the super visor y author ity 1. Member Stat es shall pro vide f or each member of their super visor y author ities to be appoint ed by means of a transparent procedure by: their parliament ; their go ver nment ; their head of Stat e; or an independent body entr uste d with the appointment under Member Stat e la w . 2. Each member shall hav e the qualifi cations, exper ience and skills, in par ticular in the area of the prote ction of personal data, required to perform its duties and exer cise its po wers. 3. The duties of a member shall end in the event of the expir y of the term of off ice, resignation or compulsor y retirement, in accordance with the law of the Member Stat e concer ned. 4. A member shall be dismissed only in cases of ser ious misconduct or if the member no longer fulf ils the conditions required f or the perf or mance of the duties. Ar ticle 54 Rules on the est ablishment of the super visor y author ity 1. Each Member State shall pro vide by la w f or all of the f ollo wing: (a) the establishment of each super visor y author ity ; 4.5.2016 L 119/66 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) the qualifi cations and eligibility conditions required to be appointed as member of each super visor y author ity ; (c) the r ules and procedures f or the appointment of the member or members of each super visor y author ity ; (d) the duration of the term of the member or members of each super visor y author ity of no less than f our ye ars, excep t f or the fi rst appointment af te r 24 Ma y 2016, par t of whic h ma y take place f or a shor ter per iod where that is necessar y to prote ct the independence of the super visor y author ity by means of a staggered appointment procedure; (e) whether and, if so, f or ho w many term s the member or members of each super visor y author ity is eligible f or reappointment ; (f) the conditions go ver ning the oblig ations of the member or members and staff of each super visor y author ity , prohibitions on actions, occupations and benefi ts incompati ble therewith dur ing and af ter the term of office and r ules go ver ning the cessation of emplo yment. 2. The member or members and the staff of each super visor y author ity shall, in accordance with Union or Member Stat e la w , be subject to a duty of profe ssional secrecy both dur ing and af ter their term of office, with regard to any conf idential inf or mation whic h has come to their kno wledge in the course of the performa nce of their task s or exer cise of their po wers. Dur ing their te r m of off ice, that duty of professiona l secrecy shall in par ticular apply to repor ting by natural persons of infr inge ments of this Regulation. Section 2 Competence, t asks and po w ers Ar ticle 55 Competence 1. Each super visor y author ity shall be compet ent f or the perf or mance of the tasks assigned to and the exercise of the po wers conferr ed on it in accordance with this Regulation on the terr it or y of its o wn Member State . 2. Where processing is car r ied out by public author ities or pr ivate bodies acting on the basis of point (c) or (e) of Ar ticle 6(1), the super visor y author ity of the Member Stat e concer ned shall be compet ent. In such cases Ar ticle 56 does not apply . 3. Super visor y author ities shall not be compet ent to super vise processing operations of cour ts acting in their judicial capacity . Ar ticle 56 Competence of the lead super visor y author ity 1. Without prejudice to Ar ticle 55, the super visor y author ity of the main establishment or of the sing le establishment of the controller or processor shall be compet ent to act as lead super visor y author ity f or the cross-border processing car r ied out by that controller or processor in accordance with the procedure pro vided in Ar ticle 60. 2. By deroga tion from paragraph 1, each super visor y author ity shall be compet ent to handle a compl aint lodg ed with it or a possible infr ingement of this Regulation, if the subject matte r relat es only to an establishment in its Member State or substantially aff ects data subjects only in its Member State . 3. In the cases refer red to in paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle, the super visor y author ity shall inf or m the lead super visor y author ity without dela y on that matte r . Within a per iod of three weeks af ter being inf or med the lead super visor y author ity shall decide whether or not it will handle the case in accordance with the procedure pro vided in Ar ticle 60, taking into account whether or not there is an establishment of the controller or processor in the Member Stat e of whic h the super visor y author ity inf or med it. 4.5.2016 L 119/67 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 4. Where the lead super visor y author ity decides to handle the case, the procedure pro vided in Ar ticle 60 shall apply . The super visor y author ity which inf or med the lead super visor y author ity ma y submit to the lead super visor y author ity a draf t f or a decision. The lead super visor y author ity shall take utmost account of that draf t when prepar ing the draf t decision refer red to in Ar ticle 60(3). 5. Where the lead super visor y author ity decides not to handle the case, the super visor y author ity which inf or med the lead super visor y author ity shall handle it according to Ar ticles 61 and 62. 6. The lead super visor y author ity shall be the sole interlocut or of the controller or processor f or the cross-border processing car r ied out by that controller or processor . Ar ticle 57 T asks 1. Without prejudice to other tasks set out under this Regulation, each super visor y author ity shall on its terr itory : (a) monitor and enf orce the application of this Regulation; (b) promote public awar eness and understanding of the r isks , r ules, safeg uards and r ights in relation to processing. A ctivities addressed specifi cally to c hildren shall receive specifi c att ention; (c) advise, in accordance with Member State la w , the national parliament, the go ver nment, and other institutions and bodies on legislative and administrative measures relating to the protection of natural persons' r ights and freedoms with regar d to processing; (d) promote the awareness of controllers and processors of their oblig ations under this Regulation; (e) upon request, pro vide inf or mation to an y data subject concer ning the exercise of their r ights under this Regulation and, if appropr iat e, cooperate with the super visor y author ities in other Member Stat es to that end; (f) handle compl aints lodg ed by a data subject, or by a body , org anisation or association in accordance with Ar ticle 80, and investig ate, to the extent appropr iat e, the subject matter of the compl aint and inf or m the compl ainant of the progress and the outcome of the inve stigation within a reasonable per iod, in par ticular if fur ther inv estigation or coordination with another super visor y author ity is necessar y ; (g) cooperate with, including shar ing inf or mation and pro vide mutual assistance to, other super visor y author ities with a view to ensur ing the consist ency of application and enf orcement of this Regulation; (h) conduct inv estigations on the application of this Regulation, including on the basis of inf or mation received from another super visor y author ity or other public author ity ; (i) monitor relevant developments, insof ar as they ha ve an impact on the prot ection of personal data, in par ticular the development of inf or mation and communication te chnologies and commercial practices; (j) adopt standard contractual clauses refer red to in Ar ticle 28(8) and in point (d) of Ar ticle 46(2); (k) establish and maintain a list in relation to the requirement f or data protection im pact assessment pursuant to Ar ticle 35(4); (l) give advice on the processing operations refer red to in Ar ticle 36(2); (m) encourage the dra wing up of codes of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 40(1) and pro vide an opinion and appro ve such codes of conduct which pro vide suff icient safeguards, pursuant to Ar ticle 40(5); (n) encourage the establishment of data prot ection cer tification mechanis ms and of data prot ection seals and marks pursuant to Ar ticle 42(1), and appro ve the cr iter ia of cer tification pursuant to Ar ticle 42(5); (o) where applicable, car r y out a per iodic review of cer tifications issued in accordance with Ar ticle 42(7); 4.5.2016 L 119/68 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (p) draf t and publish the cr it er ia f or accreditation of a body f or monitori ng codes of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 41 and of a cer tif ication body pursuant to Ar ticle 43; (q) conduct the accreditation of a body f or monitori ng codes of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 41 and of a cer tificat ion body pursuant to Ar ticle 43; (r) author ise contractual clauses and pro visions refe r red to in Ar ticle 46(3); (s) appro ve binding cor porat e r ules pursuant to Ar ticle 47; (t) contr ibut e to the activities of the Board; (u) keep internal records of infr ingements of this Regulation and of measures take n in accordance with Ar ticle 58(2); and (v) fulfil an y other tasks relat ed to the prot ection of personal data. 2. Each super visor y author ity shall f acilitate the submission of compl aints refe r red to in point (f) of paragraph 1 by measures such as a compl aint submission f or m whic h can also be compl eted electronically , without excl uding other means of communication. 3. The perf or mance of the tasks of each super visor y author ity shall be free of c harge f or the data subject and, where applicable, f or the data protection off icer . 4. Where requests are manifest ly unf ounded or excessive, in par ticular because of their repetitive c haracter , the super visor y author ity ma y c harge a reasonable fee based on administrative costs, or refuse to act on the request. The super visor y author ity shall bear the burden of demonstrating the manifes tly unf ounded or excess ive c haract er of the request. Ar ticle 58 P o w ers 1. Each super visor y author ity shall hav e all of the f ollo wing inve stigative po wers: (a) to order the controller and the processor , and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's representative to pro vide any inf or mation it requires f or the performa nce of its tasks; (b) to car r y out inv estigat ions in the f or m of data prot ection audits; (c) to car r y out a review on cer tif ications issued pursuant to Ar ticle 42(7); (d) to notify the controller or the processor of an allege d infr inge ment of this Regulation; (e) to obtain, from the controller and the processor , access to all personal data and to all inf or mation necessar y f or the performa nce of its tasks; (f) to obtain access to an y premises of the controller and the processor , including to any data processing equipment and means, in accordance with U nion or Member Stat e procedural law . 2. Each super visor y author ity shall hav e all of the f ollo wing cor rective po wers: (a) to issue war nings to a controller or processor that intended processing operations are likely to infr inge pro visions of this Regulation; (b) to issue repr imands to a controller or a processor where processing operations ha ve infr inge d pro visions of this Regulation; (c) to order the controller or the processor to compl y with the data subject's requests to exe rcise his or her r ights pursuant to this Regulation; 4.5.2016 L 119/69 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (d) to order the controller or processor to br ing processing operations into compl iance with the pro visions of this Regulation, where appropr iat e, in a specified manner and within a specif ied per iod; (e) to order the controller to communicat e a personal data breach to the data subject ; (f) to im pose a tem porar y or definit ive limitation including a ban on processing; (g) to order the rectificati on or erasure of personal data or restr iction of processing pursuant to Ar ticles 16, 17 and 18 and the notification of such actions to recipients to whom the personal data hav e been disclosed pursuant to Ar ticle 17(2) and Ar ticle 19; (h) to withdra w a cer tification or to order the cer tificat ion body to withdraw a cer tification issued pursuant to Ar ticles 42 and 43, or to order the cer tificat ion body not to issue cer tif ication if the requirements f or the cer tifi cation are not or are no long er met ; (i) to impose an administrative fine pursuant to Ar ticle 83, in addition to, or inste ad of measures ref er red to in this paragraph, depending on the circumstances of each individual case; (j) to order the suspension of data f lo ws to a recipient in a third countr y or to an international org anisation. 3. Each super visor y author ity shall hav e all of the f ollo wing author isation and advisor y po wers: (a) to advise the controller in accordance with the pr ior consultation procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 36; (b) to issue, on its o wn initiative or on request, opinions to the national parliament, the Member Stat e go ver nment or , in accordance with Member State la w , to other institutions and bodies as well as to the public on any issue related to the prote ction of personal data; (c) to author ise processing refe r red to in Ar ticle 36(5), if the la w of the Member Stat e requires such pr ior author isation; (d) to issue an opinion and appro ve draf t codes of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 40(5); (e) to accredit cer tification bodies pursuant to Ar ticle 43; (f) to issue cer tif ications and appro ve cr iter ia of cer tification in accordance with Ar ticle 42(5); (g) to adopt standard data prote ction clauses refer red to in Ar ticle 28(8) and in point (d) of Ar ticle 46(2); (h) to author ise contractual clauses ref er red to in point (a) of Ar ticle 46(3); (i) to author ise administrative ar rang ements refer red to in point (b) of Ar ticle 46(3); (j) to appro ve binding cor porat e r ules pursuant to Ar ticle 47. 4. The exercise of the po wers conferr ed on the super visor y author ity pursuant to this Ar ticle shall be subject to appropr iate safeguards, including effective judicial remedy and due process, set out in Union and Member State la w in accordance with the Char ter . 5. Each Member Stat e shall pro vide by la w that its super visor y author ity shall hav e the po wer to br ing infr inge ments of this Regulation to the attenti on of the judicial author ities and where appropr iat e, to commence or engag e other wise in leg al proceedings, in order to enf orce the pro visions of this Regulation. 6. Each Member State ma y pro vide by la w that its super visor y author ity shall hav e additional po wers to those refe r red to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3. The exercise of those po wers shall not imp air the eff ective operation of Chapt er VII. Ar ticle 59 Acti vity repor ts Each super visor y author ity shall dra w up an annual repor t on its activities, which ma y include a list of types of infr ingemen t notifi ed and types of measures taken in accordance with Ar ticle 58(2). Those repor ts shall be transmitted to the national parliament, the go ver nment and other author ities as designat ed by Member State la w . They shall be made av ailable to the public, to the Commission and to the Board. 4.5.2016 L 119/70 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN CHAPTER VII Cooper ation and consistency Section 1 Cooperation Ar ticle 60 Cooperation betw een the lead super visor y author ity and the other super visor y author ities concer ned 1. The lead super visor y author ity shall cooperat e with the other super visor y author ities concer ned in accordance with this Ar ticle in an endeav our to reach consensus. The lead super visor y author ity and the super visor y author ities concer ned shall exc hange all relevant inf or mation with each other . 2. The lead super visor y author ity ma y request at an y time other super visor y author ities concer ned to pro vide mutual assistance pursuant to Ar ticle 61 and ma y conduct joint operations pursuant to Ar ticle 62, in par ticular f or car r ying out inv estigations or f or monitoring the implementation of a measure concer ning a controller or processor established in another Member Stat e. 3. The lead super visor y author ity shall, without dela y , communicate the relevant inf or mation on the matte r to the other super visor y author ities concer ned. It shall without dela y submit a draf t decision to the other super visor y author ities concer ned f or their opinion and take due account of their views. 4. Where any of the other super visor y author ities concer ned within a per iod of f our weeks af ter hav ing been consulte d in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Ar ticle, expresses a relevant and reasoned objection to the draf t decision, the lead super visor y author ity shall, if it does not f ollo w the relevant and reasoned objection or is of the opinion that the objection is not relevant or reasoned, submit the matt er to the consistency mechani sm refe r red to in Ar ticle 63. 5. Where the lead super visor y author ity inte nds to f ollo w the relevant and reasoned objection made, it shall submit to the other super visor y author ities concer ned a revised draf t decision f or their opinion. That revised draf t decision shall be subject to the procedure refer red to in paragraph 4 within a per iod of two weeks. 6. Where none of the other super visor y author ities concer ned has objected to the draf t decision submitted by the lead super visor y author ity within the per iod refer red to in paragraphs 4 and 5, the lead super visor y author ity and the super visor y author ities concer ned shall be deemed to be in agreement with that draf t decision and shall be bound by it. 7. The lead super visor y author ity shall adopt and notify the decision to the main establishment or sing le establishment of the controller or processor , as the case ma y be and inf or m the other super visor y author ities concer ned and the Board of the decision in question, including a summar y of the relevant f acts and grounds. The super visor y author ity with which a compl aint has been lodged shall inf or m the complainant on the decision. 8. By deroga tion from paragraph 7, where a compl aint is dismissed or rejected, the super visor y author ity with which the compl aint was lodged shall adopt the decision and notify it to the compl ainant and shall inf or m the controller thereof. 9. Where the lead super visor y author ity and the super visor y author ities concer ned agree to dismiss or reject par ts of a compl aint and to act on other par ts of that compl aint, a separate decision shall be adopt ed f or each of those par ts of the matte r . The lead super visor y author ity shall adopt the decision f or the par t concer ning actions in relation to the controller , shall notify it to the main establishment or sing le establishment of the controller or processor on the terr itory of its Member Stat e and shall inf or m the compl ainant thereof, while the super visor y author ity of the compl ainant shall adopt the decision f or the par t concer ning dismissal or rejection of that complaint, and shall notify it to that compl ainant and shall inf or m the controller or processor thereof. 10. Af ter being notifi ed of the decision of the lead super visor y author ity pursuant to paragraphs 7 and 9, the controller or processor shall take the necessar y measures to ensure compl iance with the decision as regards processing activities in the context of all its establishments in the U nion. The controller or processor shall notify the measures take n f or complying with the decision to the lead super visor y author ity , which shall inf or m the other super visor y author ities concer ned. 4.5.2016 L 119/71 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 11. Where, in excep tional circumstances, a super visor y author ity concer ned has reasons to consider that there is an urg ent need to act in order to protect the inte rests of data subjects, the urgency procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 66 shall apply . 12. The lead super visor y author ity and the other super visor y author ities concer ned shall supply the inf or mation required under this Ar ticle to eac h other by electronic means, using a standardised f or mat. Ar ticle 61 Mutual assist ance 1. Super visor y author ities shall pro vide each other with relevant inf or mation and mutual assistance in order to im plement and apply this Regulation in a consistent manner , and shall put in place measures f or effective cooperation with one another . Mutual assistance shall co ver , in par ticular , inf or mation requests and super visor y measures, such as requests to car r y out pr ior author isations and consultations, inspections and inv estigations. 2. Each super visor y author ity shall take all appropr iate measures required to reply to a request of another super visor y author ity without undue dela y and no later than one month af ter receiving the request. Such measures ma y include, in par ticular , the transmission of relevant inf or mation on the conduct of an inv estigat ion. 3. Requests f or assistance shall contain all the necessar y inf or mation, including the pur pose of and reasons f or the request. Inf or mation exc hanged shall be used only f or the pur pose f or whic h it was requested. 4. The requested super visor y author ity shall not refuse to comply with the request unless: (a) it is not compet ent f or the subject-matt er of the request or f or the measures it is request ed to execut e; or (b) compl iance with the request w ould infr inge this Regulation or Uni on or Member State la w to which the super visor y author ity receiving the request is subject. 5. The requeste d super visor y author ity shall inf or m the requesting super visor y author ity of the results or , as the case ma y be, of the progress of the measures tak en in order to respond to the request. The request ed super visor y author ity shall pro vide reasons f or any refusal to compl y with a request pursuant to paragraph 4. 6. Requeste d super visor y author ities shall, as a r ule, supply the inf or mation requeste d by other super visor y author ities by electronic means, using a standardised f or mat. 7. Requeste d super visor y author ities shall not charg e a f ee f or an y action take n by them pursuant to a request f or mutual assistance. Super visor y author ities ma y agree on r ules to indemnify each other f or specifi c expenditure ar ising from the pro vision of mutual assistance in excep tional circumstances. 8. Where a super visor y author ity does not pro vide the inf or mation refer red to in paragraph 5 of this Ar ticle within one month of receiving the request of another super visor y author ity , the requesting super visor y author ity ma y adopt a pro visional measure on the terr it or y of its Member State in accordance with Ar ticle 55(1). In that case, the urg ent need to act under Ar ticle 66(1) shall be presumed to be met and require an urg ent binding decision from the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 66(2). 9. The Commission ma y , by means of im plementing acts, specify the f or mat and procedures f or mutual assistance refe r red to in this Ar ticle and the ar rang ements f or the exc hange of inf or mation by electronic means between super visor y author ities, and between super visor y author ities and the Board, in par ticular the standardised f or mat refe r red to in paragraph 6 of this Ar ticle. Those im plementing acts shall be adop ted in accordance with the examination procedure refer red to in Ar ticle 93(2). Ar ticle 62 Joint operations of super visor y author ities 1. The super visor y author ities shall, where appropr iat e, conduct joint operations including joint investig ations and joint enf orcement measures in whic h members or staff of the super visor y author ities of other Member States are inv olved. 4.5.2016 L 119/72 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. Where the controller or processor has establishments in several Member Stat es or where a signif icant number of data subjects in more than one Member State are likely to be substantially affe cted by processing operations, a super visor y author ity of each of those Member States shall hav e the r ight to par ticipate in joint operations. The super visor y author ity which is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticle 56(1) or (4) shall invit e the super visor y author ity of each of those Member Stat es to take par t in the joint operations and shall respond without dela y to the request of a super visor y author ity to par ticipate. 3. A super visor y author ity ma y , in accordance with Member State la w , and with the seconding super visor y author ity's author isation, confer po wers, including inv estigative po wers on the seconding super visor y author ity's members or staff inv olved in joint operations or , in so far as the la w of the Member Stat e of the host super visor y author ity per mits, allo w the seconding super visor y author ity's members or staff to exercise their inv estigat ive po wers in accordance with the law of the Member Stat e of the seconding super visor y author ity . Such inv estigative po wers ma y be exer cised only under the guidance and in the presence of members or staff of the host super visor y author ity . The seconding super visor y author ity's members or staff shall be subject to the Member State law of the host super visor y author ity . 4. Where, in accordance with paragraph 1, staff of a seconding super visor y author ity operat e in another Member Stat e, the Member Stat e of the host super visor y author ity shall assume responsibility f or their actions, including liability , f or an y damage caused by them dur ing their operations, in accordance with the la w of the Member State in whose terr itory the y are operating. 5. The Member Stat e in whose terr itory the damage was caused shall make good such damage under the conditions applicable to damage caused by its o wn staff. The Member State of the seconding super visor y author ity whose staff has caused damage to an y person in the terr itory of another Member State shall reimburse that other Member Stat e in full an y sums it has paid to the persons entitled on their behalf. 6. Without prejudice to the exercise of its r ights vis--vis third par ties and with the exce ption of paragraph 5, each Member State shall refrain, in the case pro vided f or in paragraph 1, from requesting reimbursement from another Member State in relation to damage ref er red to in paragraph 4. 7. Where a joint operation is intended and a super visor y author ity does not, within one month, compl y with the oblig ation laid do wn in the second senten ce of paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle, the other super visor y author ities ma y adopt a pro visional measure on the terr itory of its Member State in accordance with Ar ticle 55. In that case, the urg ent need to act under Ar ticle 66(1) shall be presumed to be met and require an opinion or an urg ent binding decision from the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 66(2). Section 2 Consistency Ar ticle 63 Consist ency mechanism In order to contr ibute to the consiste nt application of this Regulation throughout the Union, the super visor y author ities shall cooperat e with each other and, where relevant, with the Commission, through the consiste ncy mechanism as set out in this Section. Ar ticle 64 Opinion of the Board 1. The Board shall issue an opinion where a compet ent super visor y author ity inte nds to adopt an y of the measures belo w . T o that end, the compet ent super visor y author ity shall communicate the draf t decision to the Board, when it: (a) aims to adopt a list of the processing operations subject to the requirement f or a data prot ection im pact assessment pursuant to Ar ticle 35(4); (b) concer ns a matt er pursuant to Ar ticle 40(7) whether a draf t code of conduct or an amendment or extensi on to a code of conduct compl ies with this Regulation; 4.5.2016 L 119/73 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (c) aims to appro ve the cr ite r ia f or accreditation of a body pursuant to Ar ticle 41(3) or a cer tification body pursuant to Ar ticle 43(3); (d) aims to det er mine standard data prote ction clauses refer red to in point (d) of Ar ticle 46(2) and in Ar ticle 28(8); (e) aims to author ise contractual clauses refer red to in point (a) of Ar ticle 46(3); or (f) aims to appro ve binding cor porate r ules within the meaning of Ar ticle 47. 2. Any super visor y author ity , the Chair of the Board or the Commission ma y request that any matt er of g eneral application or producing effects in more than one Member Stat e be examined by the Board with a view to obtaining an opinion, in par ticular where a compet ent super visor y author ity does not compl y with the oblig ations f or mutual assistance in accordance with Ar ticle 61 or f or joint operations in accordance with Ar ticle 62. 3. In the cases refer red to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the Board shall issue an opinion on the matte r submitted to it pro vided that it has not already issued an opinion on the same matter . That opinion shall be adopt ed within eight weeks by sim ple major ity of the members of the Board. That per iod ma y be exte nded by a fur ther six week s, taking into account the complexity of the subject matte r . Rega rding the draf t decision refer red to in paragraph 1 circulat ed to the members of the Board in accordance with paragraph 5, a member whic h has not objected within a reasonable per iod indicated by the Chair , shall be deemed to be in agreement with the draf t decision. 4. Super visor y author ities and the Commission shall, without undue dela y , communicate by electronic means to the Board, using a standardised f or mat any relevant inf or mation, including as the case ma y be a summar y of the f acts, the draf t decision, the grounds which make the enactment of such measure necessar y , and the views of other super visor y author ities concer ned. 5. The Chair of the Board shall, without undue, dela y inf or m by electronic means: (a) the members of the Board and the Commission of an y relevant inf or mation which has been communicated to it using a standardised f or mat. The secretar iat of the Board shall, where necessar y , pro vide translations of relevant inf or mation; and (b) the super visor y author ity ref er red to, as the case ma y be, in paragraphs 1 and 2, and the Commission of the opinion and make it public. 6. The compet ent super visor y author ity shall not adopt its draf t decision refer red to in paragraph 1 within the per iod refe r red to in paragraph 3. 7. The super visor y author ity refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall take utmost account of the opinion of the Board and shall, within two weeks af ter receiving the opinion, communicate to the Chair of the Board by electronic means whether it will maintain or amend its draf t decision and, if an y , the amended draf t decision, using a standardised f or mat. 8. Where the super visor y author ity concer ned inf or ms the Chair of the Board within the per iod refer red to in paragraph 7 of this Ar ticle that it does not intend to f ollo w the opinion of the Board, in whole or in par t, pro viding the relevant grounds, Ar ticle 65(1) shall apply . Ar ticle 65 Dispute resolution b y the Board 1. In order to ensure the cor rect and consistent application of this Regulation in individual cases, the Board shall adopt a binding decision in the f ollo wing cases: (a) where, in a case refer red to in Ar ticle 60(4), a super visor y author ity concer ned has raised a relevant and reasoned objection to a draf t decision of the lead author ity or the lead author ity has reject ed such an objection as being not relevant or reasoned. The binding decision shall concer n all the matt ers whic h are the subject of the relevant and reasoned objection, in par ticular whether there is an infr ing ement of this Regulation; 4.5.2016 L 119/74 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) where there are conf licting views on which of the super visor y author ities concer ned is compet ent f or the main establishment ; (c) where a compet ent super visor y author ity does not request the opinion of the Board in the cases refe r red to in Ar ticle 64(1), or does not f ollo w the opinion of the Board issued under Ar ticle 64. In that case, an y super visor y author ity concer ned or the Commission ma y communicat e the matte r to the Board. 2. The decision refer red to in paragraph 1 shall be adopt ed within one month from the ref er ral of the subject-matt er by a two-thirds maj or ity of the members of the Board. That per iod ma y be exte nded by a fur ther month on account of the compl exity of the subject-matter . The decision refe r red to in paragraph 1 shall be reasoned and addressed to the lead super visor y author ity and all the super visor y author ities concer ned and binding on them. 3. Where the Board has been unable to adopt a decision within the per iods ref er red to in paragraph 2, it shall adopt its decision within two weeks f ollo wing the expiration of the second month refer red to in paragraph 2 by a simple maj or ity of the members of the Board. Where the members of the Board are split, the decision shall by adopt ed by the v ote of its Chair . 4. The super visor y author ities concer ned shall not adop t a decision on the subject matter submitted to the Board under paragraph 1 dur ing the per iods refer red to in paragraphs 2 and 3. 5. The Chair of the Board shall notify , without undue dela y , the decision refer red to in paragraph 1 to the super visor y author ities concer ned. It shall inf or m the Commission thereof. The decision shall be published on the website of the Board without dela y af ter the super visor y author ity has notified the final decision refe r red to in paragraph 6. 6. The lead super visor y author ity or , as the case ma y be, the super visor y author ity with whic h the complaint has been lodge d shall adopt its final decision on the basis of the decision refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle, without undue dela y and at the latest by one month af ter the Board has notified its decision. The lead super visor y author ity or , as the case ma y be, the super visor y author ity with which the compl aint has been lodg ed, shall inf or m the Board of the dat e when its fi nal decision is notifi ed respectively to the controller or the processor and to the data subject. The final decision of the super visor y author ities concer ned shall be adopt ed under the term s of Ar ticle 60(7), (8) and (9). The final decision shall refer to the decision refe r red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle and shall specify that the decision refe r red to in that paragraph will be published on the website of the Board in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Ar ticle. The final decision shall attach the decision ref er red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle. Ar ticle 66 Urgency procedure 1. In excep tional circumstances, where a super visor y author ity concer ned considers that there is an urg ent need to act in order to prot ect the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, it ma y , by wa y of derog ation from the consistency mech anism refer red to in Ar ticles 63, 64 and 65 or the procedure refe r red to in Ar ticle 60, immediately adopt pro visional measures intended to produce legal eff ects on its o wn terr itory with a specified per iod of validity which shall not exce ed three months. The super visor y author ity shall, without dela y , communicate those measures and the reasons f or adopting them to the other super visor y author ities concer ned, to the Board and to the Commission. 2. Where a super visor y author ity has taken a measure pursuant to paragraph 1 and considers that final measures need urgently be adopt ed, it ma y request an urgent opinion or an urg ent binding decision from the Board, giving reasons f or requesting such opinion or decision. 3. Any super visor y author ity ma y request an urgent opinion or an urg ent binding decision, as the case ma y be, from the Board where a compe tent super visor y author ity has not take n an appropr iat e measure in a situation where there is an urg ent need to act, in order to prot ect the r ights and freedoms of data subjects, giving reasons f or requesting such opinion or decision, including f or the urg ent need to act. 4. By derog ation from Ar ticle 64(3) and Ar ticle 65(2), an urg ent opinion or an urgent binding decision refer red to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ar ticle shall be adopt ed within two weeks by sim ple maj or ity of the members of the Board. 4.5.2016 L 119/75 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 67 Exchange of inf or mation The Commission ma y adopt imple menting acts of general scope in order to specify the ar rang ements f or the exc hange of inf or mation by electronic means between super visor y author ities, and between super visor y author ities and the Board, in par ticular the standardised f or mat refer red to in Ar ticle 64. Those implementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure refe r red to in Ar ticle 93(2). Section 3 European dat a protection board Ar ticle 68 European Data Protection Board 1. The European Data Protection Board (the Board) is hereby established as a body of the U nion and shall have legal personality . 2. The Board shall be represented by its Chair . 3. The Board shall be composed of the head of one super visor y author ity of each Member State and of the European Data Prote ction Super visor , or their respective representatives. 4. Where in a Member State more than one super visor y author ity is responsible f or monitori ng the application of the pro visions pursuant to this Regulation, a joint representative shall be appointed in accordance with that Member Stat e's la w . 5. The Commission shall hav e the r ight to par ticipate in the activities and meetings of the Board without votin g r ight. The Commission shall designate a representative. The Chair of the Board shall communicate to the Commission the activities of the Board. 6. In the cases refer red to in Ar ticle 65, the European Data Protection Super visor shall have voting r ights only on decisions which concer n pr inciples and r ules applicable to the U nion institutions, bodies, off ices and age ncies whic h cor respond in substance to those of this Regulation. Ar ticle 69 Independence 1. The Board shall act independently when performin g its tasks or exer cising its po wers pursuant to Ar ticles 70 and 71. 2. Without prejudice to requests by the Commission refer red to in point (b) of Ar ticle 70(1) and in Ar ticle 70(2), the Board shall, in the per f or mance of its tasks or the exe rcise of its po wers, neither seek nor take instr uctions from an ybody . Ar ticle 70 T asks of the Board 1. The Board shall ensure the consistent application of this Regulation. T o that end, the Board shall, on its o wn initiative or , where relevant, at the request of the Commission, in par ticular: (a) monitor and ensure the cor rect application of this Regulation in the cases pro vided f or in Ar ticles 64 and 65 without prejudice to the tasks of national super visor y author ities; 4.5.2016 L 119/76 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (b) advise the Commission on an y issue related to the protection of personal data in the Uni on, including on any proposed amendment of this Regulation; (c) advise the Commission on the f or mat and procedures f or the exc hange of inf or mation between controllers, processors and super visor y author ities f or binding cor porat e r ules; (d) issue guidelines, recommendations, and best practices on procedures f or erasing links, copies or replications of personal data from publicly ava ilable communication ser vices as refer red to in Ar ticle 17(2); (e) examine, on its o wn initiative, on request of one of its members or on request of the Commission, any question co ver ing the application of this Regulation and issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in order to encourage consistent application of this Regulation; (f) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph f or fur ther specifying the cr ite r ia and conditions f or decisions based on profiling pursuant to Ar ticle 22(2); (g) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph f or establishing the personal data breac hes and determi ning the undue dela y refer red to in Ar ticle 33(1) and (2) and f or the par ticular circumstances in which a controller or a processor is required to notify the personal data breac h; (h) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph as to the circumstances in which a personal data breach is like ly to result in a high r isk to the r ights and freedoms of the natural persons refe r red to in Ar ticle 34(1). (i) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph f or the pur pose of fur ther specifying the cr it er ia and requirements f or personal data transfers based on binding cor porat e r ules adhered to by controllers and binding cor porat e r ules adhered to by processors and on fur ther necessar y requirements to ensure the protection of personal data of the data subjects concer ned refer red to in Ar ticle 47; (j) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph f or the pur pose of fur ther specifying the cr ite r ia and requirements f or the personal data transfer s on the basis of Ar ticle 49(1); (k) dra w up guidelines f or super visor y author ities concer ning the application of measures refer red to in Ar ticle 58(1), (2) and (3) and the setting of administrative fi nes pursuant to Ar ticle 83; (l) review the practical application of the guidelines, recommendations and best practices refer red to in points (e) and (f); (m) issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph f or establishing common procedures f or repor ting by natural persons of infr ing ements of this Regulation pursuant to Ar ticle 54(2); (n) encourage the drawing-up of codes of conduct and the establishment of data prot ection cer tif ication mechanis ms and data prot ection seals and marks pursuant to Ar ticles 40 and 42; (o) car r y out the accreditation of cer tif ication bodies and its per iodic review pursuant to Ar ticle 43 and maintain a public register of accredite d bodies pursuant to Ar ticle 43(6) and of the accredited controllers or processors established in third countr ies pursuant to Ar ticle 42(7); (p) specify the requirements refer red to in Ar ticle 43(3) with a view to the accreditation of cer tificat ion bodies under Ar ticle 42; (q) pro vide the Commission with an opinion on the cer tif ication requirements refe r red to in Ar ticle 43(8); (r) pro vide the Commission with an opinion on the icons refer red to in Ar ticle 12(7); (s) pro vide the Commission with an opinion f or the assessment of the adequacy of the level of protection in a third countr y or internati onal org anisation, including f or the assessment whether a third countr y , a terr it or y or one or more specified sector s within that third countr y , or an intern ational org anisation no long er ensures an adequate level of prot ection. T o that end, the Commission shall pro vide the Board with all necessar y documentation, including cor respondence with the go ver nment of the third countr y , with regard to that third countr y , terr itory or specifi ed sect or , or with the intern ational organisati on. 4.5.2016 L 119/77 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN (t) issue opinions on draf t decisions of super visor y author ities pursuant to the consist ency mech anism ref er red to in Ar ticle 64(1), on matt ers submitted pursuant to Ar ticle 64(2) and to issue binding decisions pursuant to Ar ticle 65, including in cases refe r red to in Ar ticle 66; (u) promote the cooperation and the eff ective bilate ral and multilat eral exc hange of inf or mation and best practices between the super visor y author ities; (v) promote common training programmes and f acilitate personnel exc hang es between the super visor y author ities and, where appropr iate, with the super visor y author ities of third countr ies or with internati onal org anisations; (w) promote the exc hange of kno wledge and documentation on data protection legislation and practice with data prote ction super visor y author ities w orldwide. (x) issue opinions on codes of conduct dra wn up at U nion level pursuant to Ar ticle 40(9); and (y) maintain a publicly accessible electronic register of decisions taken by super visor y author ities and cour ts on issues handled in the consiste ncy mechani sm. 2. Where the Commission requests advice from the Board, it ma y indicate a time limit, taking into account the urg ency of the matt er . 3. The Board shall f or ward its opinions, guidelines, recommendations, and best practices to the Commission and to the committee refer red to in Ar ticle 93 and make them public. 4. The Board shall, where appropr iate, consult inter ested par ties and give them the oppor tunity to comment within a reasonable per iod. The Board shall, without prejudice to Ar ticle 76, make the results of the consultation procedure publicly av ailable. Ar ticle 71 Repor ts 1. The Board shall dra w up an annual repor t regarding the prot ection of natural persons with regar d to processing in the Union and, where relevant, in third countr ies and international orga nisations. The repor t shall be made public and be transmitted to the European P arliament, to the Council and to the Commission. 2. The annual repor t shall include a review of the practical application of the guidelines, recommendations and best practices refer red to in point (l) of Ar ticle 70(1) as well as of the binding decisions refer red to in Ar ticle 65. Ar ticle 72 Procedure 1. The Board shall tak e decisions by a sim ple maj or ity of its members, unless other wise pro vided f or in this Regulation. 2. The Board shall adopt its o wn r ules of procedure by a twothirds maj or ity of its members and org anise its o wn operational ar rang ements. Ar ticle 73 Chair 1. The Board shall elect a c hair and two deputy c hairs from amongst its members by sim ple maj or ity . 2. The term of off ice of the Chair and of the deputy c hairs shall be five yea rs and be renewable once. 4.5.2016 L 119/78 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 74 T asks of the Chair 1. The Chair shall hav e the f ollo wing tasks: (a) to conven e the meetings of the Board and prepare its ag enda; (b) to notify decisions adopt ed by the Board pursuant to Ar ticle 65 to the lead super visor y author ity and the super visor y author ities concer ned; (c) to ensure the timely performa nce of the tasks of the Board, in par ticular in relation to the consist ency mec hanism refer red to in Ar ticle 63. 2. The Board shall la y do wn the allocation of tasks between the Chair and the deputy c hairs in its r ules of procedure. Ar ticle 75 Secreta r iat 1. The Board shall hav e a secretar iat, whic h shall be pro vided by the European Data Protection Super visor . 2. The secretar iat shall perform its tasks excl usively under the instr uctions of the Chair of the Board. 3. The staff of the European Data Prot ection Super visor inv olved in car r ying out the tasks confe r red on the Board by this Regulation shall be subject to separate repor ting lines from the staff inv olved in car r ying out tasks conferr ed on the European Data Protection Super visor . 4. Where appropr iate, the Board and the European Data Prote ction Super visor shall establish and publish a Memorandum of U nderstanding implementing this Ar ticle, deter mining the term s of their cooperation, and applicable to the staff of the European Data Protection Super visor inv olved in car r ying out the tasks conferr ed on the Board by this Regulation. 5. The secretar iat shall pro vide analytical, administrative and logistical suppor t to the Board. 6. The secretar iat shall be responsible in par ticular f or: (a) the da y-to-da y business of the Board; (b) communication between the members of the Board, its Chair and the Commission; (c) communication with other institutions and the public; (d) the use of electronic means f or the internal and external communication; (e) the translation of relevant inf or mation; (f) the preparation and f ollo w-up of the meetings of the Board; (g) the preparation, draf ting and publication of opinions, decisions on the settlement of disputes between super visor y author ities and other texts adopt ed by the Board. Ar ticle 76 Conf identiality 1. The discussions of the Board shall be confidential where the Board deems it necessar y , as pro vided f or in its r ules of procedure. 4.5.2016 L 119/79 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. A ccess to documents submitte d to members of the Board, exper ts and representatives of third par ties shall be go ver ned by Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European P arliament and of the Council ( 1 ). CH APTER VIII Remedies, liability and penalties Ar ticle 77 Right to lodge a complaint with a super visor y author ity 1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or judicial remedy , ever y data subject shall hav e the r ight to lodge a compl aint with a super visor y author ity , in par ticular in the Member Stat e of his or her habitual residence, place of w ork or place of the alleg ed infr ingement if the data subject considers that the processing of personal data relating to him or her infr ing es this Regulation. 2. The super visor y author ity with which the compl aint has been lodge d shall inf or m the complainant on the progress and the outcome of the compl aint including the possibility of a judicial remedy pursuant to Ar ticle 78. Ar ticle 78 Right to an effectiv e judicial remedy against a super visor y author ity 1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy , each natural or leg al person shall hav e the r ight to an effective judicial remedy against a leg ally binding decision of a super visor y author ity concer ning them. 2. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy , each data subject shall ha ve the r ight to a an eff ective judicial remedy where the super visor y author ity whic h is compet ent pursuant to Ar ticles 55 and 56 does not handle a complaint or does not inf or m the data subject within three months on the progress or outcome of the compl aint lodg ed pursuant to Ar ticle 77. 3. Proceedings aga inst a super visor y author ity shall be brought bef ore the cour ts of the Member Stat e where the super visor y author ity is established. 4. Where proceedings are brought against a decision of a super visor y author ity whic h was preceded by an opinion or a decision of the Board in the consist ency mechanis m, the super visor y author ity shall f or ward that opinion or decision to the cour t. Ar ticle 79 Right to an effectiv e judicial remedy against a controller or processor 1. Without prejudice to any available administrative or non-judicial remedy , including the r ight to lodg e a compl aint with a super visor y author ity pursuant to Ar ticle 77, each data subject shall hav e the r ight to an eff ective judicial remedy where he or she considers that his or her r ights under this Regulation hav e been infr inged as a result of the processing of his or her personal data in non-com pliance with this Regulation. 2. Proceedings again st a controller or a processor shall be brought bef ore the cour ts of the Member Stat e where the controller or processor has an establishment. Alter natively , such proceedings ma y be brought bef ore the cour ts of the Member Stat e where the data subject has his or her habitual residence, unless the controller or processor is a public author ity of a Member State acting in the exer cise of its public po wers. 4.5.2016 L 119/80 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 Ma y 2001 regarding public access to European P arliament, Council and Commission documents (OJ L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 43). Ar ticle 80 Represent ation of dat a subjects 1. The data subject shall hav e the r ight to mandate a not-f or -profit body , org anisation or association whic h has been properly constituted in accordance with the la w of a Member Stat e, has statut or y objectives which are in the public inter est, and is active in the field of the prote ction of data subjects' r ights and freedoms with regard to the prot ection of their personal data to lodge the compl aint on his or her behalf, to exercise the r ights refer red to in Ar ticles 77, 78 and 79 on his or her behalf, and to exercise the r ight to receive compensation refer red to in Ar ticle 82 on his or her behalf where pro vided f or by Member State law . 2. Member State s ma y pro vide that any body , organisation or association refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle, in dependently of a data subject's mandate, has the r ight to lodge, in that Member State, a compl aint with the super visor y author ity whic h is compe tent pursuant to Ar ticle 77 and to exer cise the r ights refer red to in Ar ticles 78 and 79 if it considers that the r ights of a data subject under this Regulation ha ve been infr inged as a result of the processing. Ar ticle 81 Suspension of proceedings 1. Where a compet ent cour t of a Member Stat e has inf or mation on proceedings, concer ning the same subject matt er as regar ds processing by the same controller or processor , that are pending in a cour t in another Member State, it shall contact that cour t in the other Member Stat e to conf ir m the existen ce of such proceedings. 2. Where proceedings concer ning the same subject matt er as regards processing of the same controller or processor are pending in a cour t in another Member Stat e, an y compet ent cour t other than the cour t fi rst seized ma y suspend its proceedings. 3. Where those proceedings are pending at fi rst instance, an y cour t other than the cour t first seized ma y also, on the application of one of the par ties, decline jur isdiction if the cour t first seized has jur isdiction o ver the actions in question and its la w per mits the consolidation thereof. Ar ticle 82 Right to compensation and liability 1. Any person who has suffered mater ial or non-material damage as a result of an infr ingement of this Regulation shall have the r ight to receive compensation from the controller or processor f or the damage suff ered. 2. Any controller inv olved in processing shall be liable f or the damage caused by processing whic h infr inge s this Regulation. A processor shall be liable f or the damage caused by processing only where it has not compl ied with oblig ations of this Regulation specifically directed to processors or where it has acted outside or contrar y to la wful instr uctions of the controller . 3. A controller or processor shall be exem pt from liability under paragraph 2 if it pro ves that it is not in an y wa y responsible f or the event giving r ise to the damage. 4. Where more than one controller or processor , or both a controller and a processor , are inv olved in the same processing and where the y are, under paragraphs 2 and 3, responsible f or an y damage caused by processing, each controller or processor shall be held liable f or the entire damage in order to ensure eff ective compen sation of the data subject. 5. Where a controller or processor has, in accordance with paragraph 4, paid full compen sation f or the damage suff ered, that controller or processor shall be entitled to claim back from the other controllers or processors inv olved in the same processing that par t of the compen sation cor responding to their par t of responsibility f or the damage, in accordance with the conditions set out in paragraph 2. 4.5.2016 L 119/81 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 6. Cour t proceedings f or exercising the r ight to receive compen sation shall be brought bef ore the cour ts compet ent under the la w of the Member State refer red to in Ar ticle 79(2). Ar ticle 83 General conditions fo r imposing administrativ e f ines 1. Each super visor y author ity shall ensure that the imposition of administrative fi nes pursuant to this Ar ticle in respect of infr ing ements of this Regulation refer red to in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 shall in each individual case be effe ctive, propor tionate and dissuasive. 2. A dministrative fi nes shall, depending on the circumstances of eac h individual case, be imposed in addition to, or inste ad of, measures refer red to in points (a) to (h) and (j) of Ar ticle 58(2). When deciding whether to impose an administrative fi ne and deciding on the amount of the administrative fine in each individual case due regar d shall be given to the f ollo wing: (a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infr ingement taking into account the nature scope or pur pose of the processing concer ned as well as the number of data subjects affect ed and the level of damage suffered by them; (b) the intentional or neg lig ent c haracter of the infr inge ment ; (c) any action taken by the controller or processor to mitig ate the damage suffe red by data subjects; (d) the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor taking into account tec hnical and org anisational measures im plemented by them pursuant to Ar ticles 25 and 32; (e) any relevant previous infr ingements by the controller or processor ; (f) the degree of cooperation with the super visor y author ity , in order to remedy the infr ing ement and mitigat e the possible adverse effects of the infr inge ment ; (g) the catego r ies of personal data affe cted by the infr ingement ; (h) the manner in which the infr ing ement became kno wn to the super visor y author ity , in par ticular whether , and if so to what extent, the controller or processor notifi ed the infr inge ment ; (i) where measures refer red to in Ar ticle 58(2) hav e previously been ordered aga inst the controller or processor concer ned with regard to the same subject-matte r , compliance with those measures; (j) adherence to appro ved codes of conduct pursuant to Ar ticle 40 or appro ved cer tificat ion mechanisms pursuant to Ar ticle 42; and (k) any other aggra vating or mitigating fact or applicable to the circumstances of the case, such as f inancial benefits gain ed, or losses av oided, directly or indirectly , from the infr ingement. 3. If a controller or processor intentionally or neg ligently , f or the same or linked processing operations, infr inges several pro visions of this Regulation, the total amount of the administrative fi ne shall not exceed the amount specifi ed f or the grav est infr ing ement. 4. Infr inge ments of the f ollo wing pro visions shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, be subject to administrative fi nes up to 10 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an under taking, up to 2 % of the total worldwide annual tur no ver of the preceding financial year , whic hever is higher: (a) the oblig ations of the controller and the processor pursuant to Ar ticles 8, 11, 25 to 39 and 42 and 43; (b) the oblig ations of the cer tif ication body pursuant to Ar ticles 42 and 43; (c) the oblig ations of the monit or ing body pursuant to Ar ticle 41(4). 4.5.2016 L 119/82 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 5. Infr inge ments of the f ollo wing pro visions shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, be subject to administrative fi nes up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an under taking, up to 4 % of the total worldwide annual tur no ver of the preceding financial year , whic hever is higher: (a) the basic pr inciples f or processing, including conditions f or consent, pursuant to Ar ticles 5, 6, 7 and 9; (b) the data subjects' r ights pursuant to Ar ticles 12 to 22; (c) the transfers of personal data to a recipient in a third countr y or an intern ational organisation pursuant to Ar ticles 44 to 49; (d) any obligations pursuant to Member Stat e la w adopt ed under Chapt er IX; (e) non-com pliance with an order or a tem porar y or definitive limitation on processing or the suspension of data f lo ws by the super visor y author ity pursuant to Ar ticle 58(2) or f ailure to pro vide access in violation of Ar ticle 58(1). 6. Non-compli ance with an order by the super visor y author ity as refe r red to in Ar ticle 58(2) shall, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Ar ticle, be subject to administrative fi nes up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an under taking, up to 4 % of the total w orldwide annual tur no ver of the preceding financial year , whic hever is higher . 7. Without prejudice to the cor rective po wers of super visor y author ities pursuant to Ar ticle 58(2), each Member Stat e ma y la y do wn the r ules on whether and to what exte nt administrative fines ma y be impos ed on public author ities and bodies established in that Member Stat e. 8. The exer cise by the super visor y author ity of its po wers under this Ar ticle shall be subject to appropr iat e procedural safeg uards in accordance with Union and Member Stat e law , including effective judicial remedy and due process. 9. Where the legal syste m of the Member State does not pro vide f or administrative fines, this Ar ticle ma y be applied in such a manner that the fi ne is initiat ed by the compet ent super visor y author ity and imposed by compet ent national cour ts, while ensur ing that those leg al remedies are eff ective and hav e an equivalent effect to the administrative fi nes im posed by super visor y author ities. In any event, the fine s im posed shall be effe ctive, propor tionate and dissuasive. Those Member State s shall notify to the Commission the pro visions of their la ws which they adopt pursuant to this paragraph by 25 Ma y 2018 and, without dela y , an y subsequent amendment la w or amendment affe cting them. Ar ticle 84 P enalties 1. Member Stat es shall la y do wn the r ules on other penalties applicable to infr ingements of this Regulation in par ticular f or infr ingements whic h are not subject to administrative fi nes pursuant to Ar ticle 83, and shall take all measures necessar y to ensure that they are im plemented. Such penalties shall be eff ective, propor tionate and dissuasive. 2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the pro visions of its la w whic h it adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by 25 Ma y 2018 and, without dela y , any subsequent amendment aff ecting them. CHAPTE R IX Provisions r elating to specific processing situations Ar ticle 85 Processing and freedom of expression and inf or mation 1. Member State s shall by law reconcile the r ight to the prot ection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation with the r ight to freedom of expression and inf or mation, including processing f or jour nalistic pur poses and the pur poses of academic, ar tistic or lit erar y expression. 4.5.2016 L 119/83 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. For processing car r ied out f or jour nalistic pur poses or the pur pose of academic ar tistic or lit erar y expression, Member State s shall pro vide f or exem ptions or derog ations from Chapt er II (pr inciples), Chapt er III (r ights of the data subject), Chapt er IV (controller and processor), Chapt er V (transfer of personal data to third countr ies or inte r national org anisations), Chapt er VI (independent super visor y author ities), Chapt er VII (cooperation and consistency) and Chapt er IX (specif ic data processing situations) if they are necessar y to reconcile the r ight to the protect ion of personal data with the freedom of expression and inf or mation. 3. Each Member Stat e shall notify to the Commission the pro visions of its la w whic h it has adopt ed pursuant to paragraph 2 and, without dela y , an y subsequent amendment law or amendment affect ing them. Ar ticle 86 Processing and public access to off icial documents P ersonal data in official documents held by a public author ity or a public body or a pr ivate body f or the performa nce of a task car r ied out in the public inter est ma y be disclosed by the author ity or body in accordance with Union or Member Stat e la w to which the public author ity or body is subject in order to reconcile public access to official documents with the r ight to the prot ection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. Ar ticle 87 Processing of the national identif ication number Member Stat es ma y fur ther det er mine the specifi c conditions f or the processing of a national identif ication number or an y other identif ier of g eneral application. In that case the national identif ication number or an y other identifier of ge neral application shall be used only under appropr iate safegua rds f or the r ights and freedoms of the data subject pursuant to this Regulation. Ar ticle 88 Processing in the context of emplo yment 1. Member Stat es ma y , by law or by collective agreements, pro vide f or more specific r ules to ensure the prot ection of the r ights and freedoms in respect of the processing of emplo yees' personal data in the em plo yment context , in par ticular f or the pur poses of the recr uitment, the performa nce of the contract of emplo yment, including discharg e of oblig ations laid do wn by law or by collective agreements, management, planning and organisation of w ork , equality and diversity in the w orkplace, health and safety at w ork, prot ection of emplo yer's or custome r's proper ty and f or the pur poses of the exercise and enjo yment, on an individual or collective basis, of r ights and benefi ts related to emplo yment, and f or the pur pose of the te r mination of the em plo yment relationship. 2. Those r ules shall include suitable and specif ic measures to safeg uard the data subject's human dignity , legitimate inter ests and fundamental r ights, with par ticular regar d to the transparency of processing, the transfe r of personal data within a group of under takings, or a group of ent er pr ises engag ed in a joint economic activity and monitori ng systems at the w ork place. 3. Each Member Stat e shall notify to the Commission those pro visions of its law which it adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by 25 Ma y 2018 and, without dela y , any subsequent amendment aff ecting them. Ar ticle 89 Safeguards and derogations relating to processing for archiving pur poses in the public interest, scientif ic or histor ical research pur poses or st atist ical pur poses 1. Processing f or archiv ing pur poses in the public inte rest, scientifi c or histo r ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses, shall be subject to appropr iate safeguards, in accordance with this Regulation, f or the r ights and freedoms of the data subject. Those safeg uards shall ensure that tec hnical and organisational measures are in place in par ticular in 4.5.2016 L 119/84 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN order to ensure respect f or the pr inciple of data minimisation. Those measures ma y include pseudony misation pro vided that those pur poses can be fulfilled in that manner . Where those pur poses can be fulf illed by fur ther processing whic h does not per mit or no longer per mits the identif ication of data subjects, those pur poses shall be fulf illed in that manner . 2. Where personal data are processed f or scientific or histo r ical researc h pur poses or statistical pur poses, Union or Member State law ma y pro vide f or derogat ions from the r ights refe r red to in Ar ticles 15, 16, 18 and 21 subject to the conditions and safeg uards refer red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle in so f ar as such r ights are likely to render im possible or ser iously impair the achievement of the specific pur poses, and such derogations are necessar y f or the fulfilme nt of those pur poses. 3. Where personal data are processed f or arc hiving pur poses in the public interest, U nion or Member Stat e la w ma y pro vide f or derogations from the r ights refer red to in Ar ticles 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 subject to the conditions and safeg uards ref er red to in paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle in so f ar as such r ights are likely to render impossible or ser iously im pair the achi evement of the specific pur poses, and such derogat ions are necessar y f or the fulfilment of those pur poses. 4. Where processing refe r red to in paragraphs 2 and 3 ser ves at the same time another pur pose, the derog ations shall apply only to processing f or the pur poses refer red to in those paragraphs. Ar ticle 90 Obligations of secrecy 1. Member State s ma y adopt specific r ules to set out the po wers of the super visor y author ities laid do wn in points (e) and (f) of Ar ticle 58(1) in relation to controllers or processors that are subject, under U nion or Member State la w or r ules established by national compet ent bodies, to an oblig ation of profess ional secrecy or other equivalent oblig ations of secrecy where this is necessar y and propor tionate to reconcile the r ight of the protect ion of personal data with the oblig ation of secrecy . Those r ules shall apply only with regard to personal data which the controller or processor has received as a result of or has obtained in an activity co vered by that oblig ation of secrecy . 2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the r ules adopt ed pursuant to paragraph 1, by 25 Ma y 2018 and, without dela y , any subsequent amendment affecting them. Ar ticle 91 Exis ting dat a protection r ules of churches and religious associations 1. Where in a Member State, c hurches and religious associations or communities apply , at the time of entr y into f orce of this Regulation, compreh ensive r ules relating to the protect ion of natural persons with regard to processing, such r ules ma y continue to apply , pro vided that the y are brought into line with this Regulation. 2. Churche s and religious associations whic h apply comprehensive r ules in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Ar ticle shall be subject to the super vision of an independent super visor y author ity , which ma y be specific, pro vided that it fulfils the conditions laid do wn in Chapt er VI of this Regulation. CH APTER X Deleg ated acts and implementing acts Ar ticle 92 Exercise of the delegation 1. The po wer to adop t delegat ed acts is confe r red on the Commission subject to the conditions laid do wn in this Ar ticle. 4.5.2016 L 119/85 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN 2. The delegat ion of po wer refer red to in Ar ticle 12(8) and Ar ticle 43(8) shall be conferr ed on the Commission f or an indet er minate per iod of time from 24 Ma y 2016. 3. The delegatio n of po wer refer red to in Ar ticle 12(8) and Ar ticle 43(8) ma y be revok ed at any time by the European P arliament or by the Council. A decision of revocat ion shall put an end to the deleg ation of po wer specifi ed in that decision. It shall take effect the da y f ollo wing that of its publication in the Off icial Jour nal of the Eur opean Union or at a late r dat e specifi ed therein. It shall not aff ect the validity of an y delegat ed acts already in f orce. 4. As soon as it adop ts a delegat ed act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European P arliament and to the Council. 5. A delegat ed act adopt ed pursuant to Ar ticle 12(8) and Ar ticle 43(8) shall ent er into f orce only if no objection has been expressed by either the European P arliament or the Council within a per iod of three months of notifi cation of that act to the European P arliament and the Council or if, bef ore the expir y of that per iod, the European P arliament and the Council have both inf or med the Commission that they will not object. That per iod shall be extended by three months at the initiative of the European P arliament or of the Council. Ar ticle 93 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where refe rence is made to this paragraph, Ar ticle 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply . 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Ar ticle 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in conjunction with Ar ticle 5 thereof, shall apply . CHAPTE R XI Final pr ovision s Ar ticle 94 Repeal of Directiv e 95/46/EC 1. Directive 95/46/EC is repealed with effe ct from 25 Ma y 2018. 2. Ref erences to the repealed Directive shall be constr ued as references to this Regulation. References to the W orking P ar ty on the Prot ection of Individuals with regar d to the Processing of P ersonal Data established by Ar ticle 29 of Directive 95/46/EC shall be constr ued as referen ces to the European Data Protection Board established by this Regulation. Ar ticle 95 Relationship with Directiv e 2002/58/EC This Regulation shall not im pose additional oblig ations on natural or leg al persons in relation to processing in connection with the pro vision of publicly available electronic communications ser vices in public communication netw orks in the U nion in relation to matt ers f or which the y are subject to specifi c oblig ations with the same objective set out in Directive 2002/58/EC. 4.5.2016 L 119/86 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN Ar ticle 96 Relationship with previously concluded Ag reements International agreements inv olving the transfe r of personal data to third countr ies or internati onal org anisations whic h were concluded by Member States pr ior to 24 Ma y 2016, and which compl y with U nion la w as applicable pr ior to that dat e, shall remain in f orce until amended, replaced or revok ed. Ar ticle 97 Commission repor ts 1. By 25 Ma y 2020 and ever y f our ye ars thereaf ter , the Commission shall submit a repor t on the evaluation and review of this Regulation to the European P arliament and to the Council. The repor ts shall be made public. 2. In the context of the evaluations and reviews refer red to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall examine, in par ticular , the application and functioning of: (a) Chapt er V on the transfer of personal data to third countr ies or inte r national organisati ons with par ticular regar d to decisions adopt ed pursuant to Ar ticle 45(3) of this Regulation and decisions adopt ed on the basis of Ar ticle 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC; (b) Chapt er VII on cooperation and consistency . 3. For the pur pose of paragraph 1, the Commission ma y request inf or mation from Member State s and super visor y author ities. 4. In car r ying out the evaluations and reviews ref er red to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the Commission shall tak e int o account the positions and findings of the European P arliament, of the Council, and of other relevant bodies or sources. 5. The Commission shall, if necessar y , submit appropr iate proposals to amend this Regulation, in par ticular taking into account of developments in inf or mation tec hnology and in the light of the state of progress in the inf or mation society . Ar ticle 98 Review of other Union legal acts on dat a protection The Commission shall, if appropr iate, submit legislative proposals with a view to amending other U nion legal acts on the prot ection of personal data, in order to ensure unif or m and consistent protection of natural persons with regar d to processing. This shall in par ticular concer n the r ules relating to the prot ection of natural persons with regard to processing by Union institutions, bodies, off ices and agencies and on the free mo vement of such data. Ar ticle 99 Entr y int o f orce and application 1. This Regulation shall ent er into f orce on the twentieth da y f ollo wing that of its publication in the Off icial Jour nal of the Eur opean Union. 2. It shall apply from 25 Ma y 2018. 4.5.2016 L 119/87 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member State s. Done at Br ussels, 27 Apr il 2016. For the Eur opean P arliament The Pres ident M. SCH ULZ For the Council The President J.A. HENNIS-PL ASSC HAERT 4.5.2016 L 119/88 Official Jour nal of the European Union EN